Yesssss
You are proving to me why I should have gotten my ass a tutoring gig and get back to writing haha. Well now I have extra incentive to write during this program...
Yesss
It's ok we're all gonna go to Brooklyn college 
Next year in the land of midwood
Today 📆📆📆 is LABOR DAY Most people 👥👥are forced to work for PROFIT 💹💹 but I would work for YOU because YOU'RE MY COMRADE 👬👭 Send 📧 to 5 comrades who appreciate your LABOR 🔧or be EXPLOITED 🚨 by the BOURGEOISIE 🔪💸💸💸
First publishing offer for the flag poems 🍦🍦🍦☀️🌊🌞😁⛄️😁💂😁💛🐄🎻🎻😁🎻🎻🌿🙌🍧🍧🍧🍧🍧🍧🍧🍧🍧🍧🍧🍧🍧🍧💂💂💂⛄️🌀
WOW!!!! 
Yes!!!!! Where? 
It's bard's literary journal / would be in full online w an image 
Waiting to hear from 2 other places.
👏🏾👏🏾👏🏾👏🏾👏🏾👏🏾👏🏾👏🏾👏🏾👏🏾👏🏾👏🏾👏🏾👏🏾👏🏾👏🏾👏🏾👏🏾👏🏾👏🏾👏🏾👏🏾👏🏾👏🏾
Conjunctions 
Waiting to hear from fence and ugly duckling 
￼
Did u make that?!?!
Haha Nooo I don't kno photoshop. I'm a meme #curator, not #creator
I should get a grant to support my archives 
￼
Beautiful! :) 
￼This is robin after five days in Portland 
It's beautiful 
Hey I'm gonna apply for the mcsweenys column contest, which you should apply for too tom they pay 💰💰
Trying to figure out how to twist my dog advice column into something they'd be into. Any ideas on how to make it meta but still something I could do twice a month for a whole year, as per contest rules? 
￼
i’m the little girl with mouth agape 
I feel like I'm writing a break up email to dan 
everything will work out in the way it’s supposed to
she is going to go on vacation and maybe she can think a little more about the project
Should I not email her? 
whatever you think is the best way to communicate this to her
*whichever not whatever
sooner is probably better so she can get used to the idea
idk tho you guys have known each other a while so you know best
Our collaboration was doomed from the start 
But yea I should call 
maybe don’t tell her that haha
Yea I am trying not the negative in this email 
To be 
i like it better the other way
try not the negative 
kinda beautiful tbh
Which way 
?
You mean the older draft ?
 no no much simpler i was just referring to the phrasing “I’m trying not the negative”
Oh lol I feel u
sorry distracted, watching livestream of kanye’s givenchy runway show @ fashion week 
some good lqqs , a few models taking major spills
Looks like there's gonna be a big push around doing a Quincy jones oral history 
oh lord
He's excited and it's gonna be done right 
But gonna be a lot of energy since he's a huge figure to tackle. It's cool, especially since his health had been poor lately and it's great to get this while he's up for it 
my grandpa just facetimed me and wanted to FaceTime for an hour
but couldn’t figure out how to turn the sound on for me so just talked at me about things that happened in his life for one hour
they put a chip on his debit card and now he has to swipe it differently and he’s deeply disturbed by this
ay help with this 
is th is the worst closing paragraph
"So are white dogs still a thing? Have weaponized dogs, after generations of intentional breeding as hegemonic tools, been threaded into the fabric of American dogs to the point where their own bias is inextinguishable? In the third act, Julie is jolted from her nonpartisan reverie when White Dog escapes the training facility and slaughters a black man on the altar of a church. 

(screenshot church scene TK)

Unable to deny her culpability or the dog's intentions any longer, her suggestion for euthanasia is decried by a dogged Keys:  
"
"Julie: He killed a man. In a church. And I'm sure it's not the first black man he's killed. Why didn't you kill him?
Keys: I wanted to shoot him at the church.
J: Why didn't you?
K: How I wanted to put a bullet in that son of a bitch!
J: Then why the hell didn't you?
K: Because there's still a chance to cure him.
J: Cure him? He just killed a man. There is no way you can cure that dog! I want you to shoot him now, before he kills more blacks!
K: So you finally joined the club. That club of horrified people who raise holy hell about that disease - that racist hate - but do absolutely nothing to stamp it out. That dog is the only weapon we have at least to remove a part of it! If I cure him.
J: If? ""If"" is not gonna stop him from killing people!
K: Yes, Julie. I can't guarantee the result. But if I fail... I'll get another white dog... and another, or another, or another, and another... and keep on working till I lick it. Because that's the only way to stop sick people from breeding sick dogs. And goddamn it... I can't experiment on a dead dog.
"
"As a black American, I will continue to be tormented by the notion that I can somehow wield control over the oppressive system that I'm deigned to inhabit. Despite the innumerable generations of our nation's stolen labor, stolen people, and stolen lands, the ""if"" is just too strong of a possibility to ignore. And so, while I know that I can't rid the world of white dogs, I know that I can continue to sacrifice my own sanity and safety to cure them. 
"
wait changed the last sentence: And so, while I know that I can't rid the world of white dogs, I am driven to sacrifice my own sanity and safety to cure them. 
Can you email this to me? I can't read on phone 
Omg lol 
I'm being #unprofessional sorry 
I'm being a #puddlehuman
I submitted it without review because I want it #outofmylife yech yuck go away essay
Robin is going to see Matthew Barney tomorrow 
Installation 
http://www.newyorker.com/books/page-turner/when-white-poets-pretend-to-be-asian
http://nightingalecinema.org/the-garden-of-earthly-delights-2/
Hello
I stepped down from vicarious but I am still friends w dan 
And down to help u in any way.
She is gonna pay u kelly, don't worry about that. 🙏
Also shanah tova
Hi I'm not worried I trust her 
￼My mom just posted this 
Thanks tom ur a mensch 
I'm writing a short afropessimist piece about cyborg manifesto and the fact that police dogs have titanium teeth , Ty for sharing it with me 
Wow that's awesome I need that 
I'll send to u when I have a draft 
🙏
trigger warning
idf
￼
Yikes 
Do u know any rich women I can marry? Thanks- "flom"
“asking for a friend”
-flom
tell flom that all the men I know are righteously broke
*women
and men. 
￼i feel like i am going to be murdered by the militarized police 
Flom already knows 
Very well
You're not plz don't 
Tell Flom that rich women like triflin’ men 
Lol
also most of them have dad issues bc their dads r the ones giving them money? idk. or you could go for a monster sociopath like what’s her name
the one who started the sexual assault app 
??
jess ladd
i fucking hate cops
essay calling for their abolition comes out tomorrow, i guess i’ll be in their crosshairs 
Wow where ?
i just read transmetropolitan and overly identified with spider jerusalem which is terrible. 
awl
I don't know what those things are 
And awl that's rad 
ITS JUST AWL THO i don’t think they’re literate enough to know what that is 
some dogs that i know in the bronx tore up an elderly man in the middle of the street the other day, there’s a graphic video, it’s in national news cycle. i wanna do my “how to protect yourself from dog attack (police dog)” zine project but don’t have time ;_;
the world is such a bad place
why are people so terrible
￼
I just yelled at a polish women fml
She was like I'm gonna call the cops to clip your bike from the traffic sign 
landlord? aren’t you moving? 
lmao what
I said if u do that I'll call the cops on u 
GREENPOINT
Ugh greenpoint akbauxbwkwvaynwv
aren’t u moving
I need to 
But how 
it seems like it’s cheaper down there, no?
w lots space?
idk i don’t even live anywhere anymore
Yes but I have no money and no friends to move w 
I can just move w a random puppeteer it's not rational 
Lol
lmao
be reasonable tom
I'm trying 
everyone in new york is a puppeteer
meanwhile I’m on someones pinterest board called “police wife”
there is this meme that i need for my essay about like… we need to train to get the bad guys because every day the y are training to kill us??? some crazy paranoid shit
i am going insane in the public library basically 
FOUND IT
￼
￼
wtf weird meme
￼my back and forth with the awl founder this morning
￼
Omg so exciting 
Fight the trolls 
the prospect of hate mail?? the wishing for hate mail ????
Troll war 
i have had more than enough hate mail in the past year
Hate mail is a sign u are doing something right 
i guess that’s what i get for being a WARRIOR
Yea ok I haven't experienced it so I shouldn't talk 
tru tru
#warrior 
ok http://www.theawl.com/2015/09/some-of-mans-best-friends 
yay uh just emailed max to see if i can cover the police dog jamboree
yay he said maybe!
Whoa killing it 
is this too esoteric for my column contest entry 
"The film reviewer is a mixed breed shelter dog who is unsure of his origins. As the column progresses, he becomes more aware of his own shackles and begins to buck critical tradition. His aesthetic and message becomes that of anarcho-communism. He decolonizes his dog mind. The beleaguered editor becomes increasingly apologetic of his behavior until finally, the author is fired and the column is abruptly handed off to a dewy-eyed Golden Retriever with no understanding of cinema. Like, he has no clue how a plot progresses or what a movie is even. His first column is just a philosophical musing on how to get his review copy DVD to play in a VHS player. The editor, tiring of the hand-holding, shifts the column back to the original dog who is now sending dispatches from the underground, at the forefront of a revolution. 
"
Loll what 
mcsweeney’s 
column contest with no guidelines or suggested format 
I like it
It's hilarious 
Congrats on awl. The piece is great. It's all gonna happen 
thanks tom 😊 it’s thanks to you! for your encouragement!
Psh I'm just a 🐨
Also separately I think 2nd yr of grad school is gonna destroy me
is that emoji for space jew
I hope 🙏
why, more to do with the teaching?
Koalas are the only real jews 
Yea teaching is an insane Amt of work 
yea it’s kinda cray that they expect you to do both
full time school and teach a class
Yea I'm actually confused 
And also how do ppl go to grad school in New York? I am bleeding money 
Sorry too much
hi hello i hear you i have no clue how people do this
i think they take out so many loans that they become a capitalist wage slave for the rest of their lives? unless they are tal who is magical somehow
"No argument from here,
I'm preparing to spend insane amounts of money on UCLA, trying to bet against my loans each quarter. At least you didn't join me in that dumb pursuit! "
it’s all a trap
"Haha yea she is a magical elf who also didn't go to an Mfa or pay more than $200 of rent in years. 


Robin, there you are!!"
I know it is 
i meant tal the israeli man but omg yes tal is magical yes
Sorry I collapsed in a heap on my bed because I didnt drink coffee 
Yea Tal is a weird Israeli man who exists I forgot 
robin chimes in to #complain
Yea man I was there too 
#kvetch4life
make the school send you to a conference here so you can visit
I was going to one of the few film labs left open in the country. They had film cans from restoring nausicaa valley of the wind 
￼
😢
#makeithappen Tom
Invite that man 
Just you and him, sabbat dinner 
you and him at a candlelit table
😔
i’m getting insane, would it be insane for me to apply for macdowell 
i’m being insane.
Is that due now?
no it’s due january
i am on an invisible deadline of trying to get as much work done/set myself up before workers comp decides to stop paying me
and i morph back into a wage slave
my impending doom 
Yea I feel u
I'll apply if u do
We can go there and hate everybody together
i would love that because I most assuredly will hate everybody there
Yea it seems inevitable high five 
hey question
mcsweeny’s says to send a brief description of the column (keep it short)
🐭
I’ve got one that’s 375 words. is that too long? for brief
ugh i hate prompts with no information
like, we get it mcsweeney’s, you’re cutesy but u can break tone for a writing prompt
I'm sure there's no rule for that. 
If it's good they'll read it
I love this 
Thank you 
http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2015/09/higher-education-college-adjunct-professor-salary/404461/
this is my favorite line “There was certainly no leaning back into a reverie about the poetry I was about to teach! That was too dangerous.”
but yeah the world is ending
at least we won’t be the ones with our backs to the wall? 
Meaning ?
like, in the revolution university administrators will be the first to burn . etc.
Sigh 
I'm totally spent 
And I keep having to break up w Talia 
that is really sad. I’m so sorry
It's exhausting me. I just struggle w the idea of breaking up w her not in person.
But it just feels like she doesn't want to accept it 
Idk what to do 
:(
if i were in her place it would be hard for me not to feel like a breakup is purely situational
So it's an ideal time to end it yes?
So it's somehow less a rejection 
i mean i’m saying she might not accept it because it’s like, if you weren’t having a crazy 200% life and she wasn’t moving/lives far away sometimes it would be fine
you know?
like it might not be but u know
Yea you think that's what she is thinking 
But I need to pull the 200% life card 
I was just planning on waiting to see her on October 5th, in person and Doing it then 
But it seems crazy
And I feel like I'm for real hurting her :(
if you think it would be helpful to either of you to do it before then, you should consider it i guess
idk i am not there so I don’t know what’s best
Ha yea. Not sure there is a there. Talia is in Omaha and going to providence. I live in this evil place.
like if you are both in the same place next summer then you can revisit? or you could do open? 
But yea I need mental clarity.
like maybe you could even plan a detox from grad school of going to providence?
Yea I guess so.
idk i think you and i have different styles haha 
:) haha
Breakup styles ? Lol
just happy i got robin back when i was ready : ) 
: )
o wait this is the text thread with robin
ignore me
Lol
it seems like though even just on a basic logistical basis your lives are just not lining up rn 
but maybe they will in the future : ) 
(just fyi you are taking advice from someone who is rewatching beverly hills dog 3 and taking notes)
*Beverly hills chihuahua 3
i am also crying, this movie makes me cry 
u guys i got fan mail :D actually it is one fan email, one advice question from someone in pakistan, one man who wants to know if his sister in law’s dog is racist against mixed race people
so idk
Wow that's so cool
Crazy 
Awesome!!!
One of the people in my program I know firm Pomona really liked your piece too 
there’s someone in your program from pomona/??
Two ppl 
Both aren't mlis tho 
They are cms
Are they both Fred Rossof 
I am very productively just looking at old crushes on Instagram 🌀
Fml. Anyhow. Kelly you're a star. So excited for you. :)
Um no I'm just a nobody who wrote a personal essay 
Crying and watching a movie for children 
Wishing I could afford the new yeezy shoes 
Yeezy looks so happy 
Will you help me tell her that the fact that slate published an essay saying no one should write personal essays is not a reason to feel stupid for writing a great personal essay 
Yea fuck slate. Also personal essays are great. What's their angle anyhow 
personal essays are by people who spent too much energy applying to college
Yeezy is in his final form before he jettisons in to space
Yea he's like leveled up way too much 
It's just arbitrary stats he's improving. 
We need more robot essays
by next year’s nyfw everyone will be ushered into a new dawn, rising above the city skyline and over the atlantic fading into the horizon 
everyone wearing yeezy, that is
Lol
what lmao
the song he debuted on the runway today is called “Fade”
my prophecy is too accurate 
am I meant to fade with the chosen ones next fall? 
seriously though the clothes are 100% communist. except for they cost money and are being sold by a corporation
so, full partial communism
I don't understand fashion 
i just realized that I’m trying to tap into the mind of a communist dog?? 
his next column is a critique of Balto as historical dog labor exploitation
but instead of writing i am #trollingrichppl
￼
￼
Lol who is that 
Some asshole
Eattherich
￼
Just FYI be modified the Post to say that he paid $700 for the boots originally 
Robin you have a cool life I'm so proud of you 
This cool guy is half an hour early on Hollywood and might just have to eat McDonald's breakfast 👌🏻
Get a breakfast burrito they're good 
￼
Maybe you like Hollywood blvd after all 
Yeah but there's no signs that say "no human vultures", and those take up the whole entire sidewalk 
Damn this is a good McDonalds breakfast burrito!
(Sorry Tom we are now paid for native advertising)
￼Nypd sent the K-9 units to Florida???? $$$$$!! 
Sigh. 
http://www.sterneck.net/cyber/branwyn-cyberpunk/index.php
Yea I gots that 
Sent her "the" email. 😔
😞 
Oh whoops 
I thought that was cyborg 
Looks cool !
I accidentally made a dog likeness of robin 
￼
Things are getting weird over here 
It's beautiful 
http://www.theatlantic.com/education/archive/2015/09/whats-the-point-of-a-phd/405964/?utm_source=SFTwitter
ahhhh i hate writing personal statements
￼
Yes
￼what is wrong with people
hey max wants me to pitch my piece to him and give a word count. what do you think is a good word count? 1500 words? 
I would look on vice for a similar style piece and work from there 
Yes I did that! Thanks! 
https://youtu.be/z2_dhUv_CrI
Thinking of moving w Genevieve 
Cooo, where u guys looking? 
Idk meeting w her tonight! 
Can't wait to leave evil north Brooklyn 
I will miss the poles but all else can go 
I'm so excited for you 2
dam got rejected for column contest
kinda felt it in my bones anyway oh well just 3 days of wasted time
￼
Aw man! 
Sorry to hear that :/ onto the next 
￼
￼
Lmaoooooooooooooo http://carlmarks.com/
“In 1925, a young entrepreneur named Carl Marks started a foreign securities exchange business in the heart of New York City. Today, Carl Marks & Co. is one of the investment community’s most experienced merchant banking firms, operating in principal investing and advisory services. Throughout its history, Carl Marks has created value through clear thinking, creative advice and adept execution of plans, all built on a solid foundation of uncompromised integrity that has endured over time.”
So lerners a genius, or sumthin now?
http://www.freedomwithwriting.com/freedom/uncategorized/the-amy-lowell-traveling-poet-scholarship-54000-for-poets/
Capitalism really is just fucking with all of us having any roots or home 
lmao “the only contingency is that you not see your family or friends for one year, and you just live up your own ass writing poems”
￼
Wow holy shit dude this video!!! 
So cheap too
So happy you're moving 
I wish I could be ur 3rd roommie
🙏
Guys I'm about to step foot in San Francisco for the first time in 5 years 
Pray 4 me 
This is the apocalypse 
The rich have won 
"I suggested changes very lightly and Dan was happy and relieved to hear. It's all good I think. Softened the language. Thanks for the help w working that thru.

Re: short story. Do you think that approach to the virtual strike app is good? Should it be less ""poetic"" and more technical ? Any writerly thoughts?"
hey I’m glad that dan was open to changes! Makes me 😊 😊 
I think keep the poetic version for a future project, maybe lean more towards the technical just to lay out the virtual environment
 which is poetic in its structure and execution 
I like that, that's good feedback. Thanks. I'll need to work with someone on outfitting it with technical stuff.
that said i love the imagery of “plumes of data” and users like seeds in a ripe fig
Yea I like that poetic isms since it diffuses it as a call to action 
Makes it more like ambiguous which is a good way to balance tone. I think more technical stuff and a more intentional ending could balance out the politic stuff
Also already dealing w class awkwardness w genna :(
i am being a super weirdo today and listening to archived in-store Kmart tapes from 1990 
https://archive.org/details/KmartApril1991
oh yeah :( it can get kinda class awkward with her
yeah i think if you do those two things it will really make the work shine 
i’m here at the library robin works at watching him work from across the room 😻 he’s such a good librarian and teacher
It's been class awk btw u two ?
i mean stuff comes up and she doesn’t quite get it sometimes, the notion of having $5 to your name 
but i’m imagining that it would be really magnified trying to figure out living together?? 
how ’s it going? anything specific happen?
it’s like, living with sanford and kate and watching the fancy groceries they bought go bad every week because it didn’t matter to them 
it’s tough but that’s new york
It's just that I need her to cover for me to move into this awesome place 
And she was scandalized kinda that I only had $500 in the bank 
lmao that’s more than most of us have at any given time
I know I was pretty proud of it for a minute lol
one timewe were out getting drinks and I paid for a $3 beer with spare change. i was showing her pics in my phone and i accidentally scrolled past a screenshot of my bank account which had -$5 at the time, and it was like i had accidentally scrolled past a dick pic
she was like 😮 
Lol 
She loves dick pics come on 
you’re totally right she would have loved a good dick pic 
esp if it was robin, she loves robin
lol our strange queer friend group of writerly weirdos 
Lol to all of the above 
we hung out with some normal people this weekend and i was like 😬
these kmart tapes are v relaxing btw
news is spreading about your apartment, tom! word on the street is that it’s incredible
 🙏🙏🙏🙏 just got the keyz
🔥🔥🔥🔥🔥🔥🔥
￼
i’m having one of those weeks
wake up wanting to #die
oh looks like they’re submitting my buzzfeed app into their internal system and auto emailing all my recommenders, so since you already sent yours you can #disregard thank you 😊 
bernie sanders c 1971 ￼
Omg love!
He is great
Too bad war exists 
we just watched the debate, he killed it
Yea I saw it too
I was worried that Hilary came across as too likable despite seething w crookedness
Anyhow yea I hope he wins 
Yeah I hope so too 
the people who did the knob voting throughout the debate said that they loved bernie tho! they loved when he stood up for hillary haha
#mensch 
i loved watching his old jewish scowl throughout the debate
and his old man fidgeting
I'm doing a forced march in this household of listening to the Kmart tapes 
and I’m totally forgetting the point of writing academic papers haha
￼
￼
hey baby geniuses. poetry contest judged by claudia ranking, $500 prize 
http://www.cosmonautsavenue.com/contest/
*rankine
due november 30th 
I might submit sum poems! idk how to write poems 
oh there is a reading fee of $10 which is kinda bogus
Oh cool
Do u know if u can pitch stories somewhere ?
I was gonna pitch that strike thing when I polish it 
yes!!! 
as a short story?
Yea 😁
hm hold on gonna add u to a fb group
i think glimmer train is looking for stories
there’s a lot of calls in the group but idk of any short story ones off the top of my head, i’m always only looking for nonfiction 
￼
http://www.freedomwithwriting.com/freedom/uncategorized/8-publishers-of-horror-stories-that-pay-100/
http://www.freedomwithwriting.com/freedom/uncategorized/16-science-fiction-publishers-that-pay-200-for-short-stories/
this is a helpful site
oh and this one too: http://publishedtodeath.blogspot.com/p/speculative-fiction.html
http://publishedtodeath.blogspot.com/p/calls-for-submissions.html
"haha 
Untethered: A Magic iPhone Anthology, Published by Cantina Publishing

Looking for stories that cleverly incorporate the idea of a “magic iPhone” into any setting you like. All genres accepted except straight-up erotica or hard-core horror.

Genre: Speculative fiction

Length: 10,000 words max, 3,000-7,000 words recommended

Payment: $100, one year of exclusivity

Deadline: October 1, 2105
"
Oh cool are u lifting these from an fb group? 
some from fb group some from those sites 
the group posts are a little hit or miss, sometimes they’re like. terrible journals or zines. but sometimes good announcements
￼
Nothing genius about this baby. Just stumbling through school and halfassed paper 
do u want me to look at it again
No I'm done with it 
ok 
Printing it 
i didn’t see anything bad with it 
￼
"Yeah it's fine I'm just in this crazy thing called school again. Always feel so
foolish and cheap during it "
it’s ok it’s not pomona 
What's that mean?
i mean they won’t steal your labor and destroy you 
ar eyou in a corcoran leasing office 
“plan of the town of brooklyn: 1. kill everyone 2. put houses”
“3. go back and make sure that everyone is dead and that the house foundations are constructed from their bones”
you guys are gifs over? should i not include gifs in this article? 
http://www.pw.org/writing_contests/very_short_fiction_award
http://gothamist.com/2015/10/15/les_dorm_life.php
"Locals worried LES is turning into rich white girls' dorm" 
Yea I have a small crush on Becca. 
Crush
Little
But crush
who is beck
and becca. explain both
Lol
Beck is a pretty good white rapper.
Becca is an attractive woman from New York who went to Pomona 
Who I am getting drinks w in a few hours 
becca enid?
Yea
ah yeah the LA one
Yep I've seen her 3 times in a week
whoa
On the grounds of talking about our "work"
And then I was like wait 
*and also maybe collaborating 
qts
And I was like wait... Maybe this is because she kinda wants to make out 
It's weird it's like going on a date w someone who isn't a random person from the Internet 
And also safe since she doesn't live here haha. Def not gonna date 
so cute still aww
Also went out w the new museum girl. Not a match haha
Escaped and drunk texted Becca like hey what's up. 
Nice to feel things that are new and not heartbreak. 
:) 
I'm smilin 
🌱
We miss you 
I miss you guys too
A ticket to LA is expensive :/
I'll have to wait for my last semester loan 
Yea it's too much 
You'll see plenty of us when we're back in New York 
When are u in town again? 
First week of April 
Robin will visit in summer right?? Robin? 
Man I'm in awe of all the shit I accomplished this year, thanks to all this help from my friends/chosen family 
Ugh I fucking love my friends 👺❤️
Killing the game 
🙏
Health is my big resolution this year 
Got a pull up bar. Genna is a gym buddy. Trying to fix my body. Neglect is starting to hurt.
Basic stuff. Haven't exercised in too long.
And also first book #goal for this year
Yes it's all starting to catch up with us, the health 
I turn 30 this year 😾
29 in July for me, Jesus 
It's gonna be good, 29/30/31...
It's gonna be so beautiful I think, the next few years 
I'm more broke than tom 
So not sure I can come this summer 
Damn if u are more broken than me :((
*broke
Haha
We are constant broke 
Bent never broke we should say 
Also Georgia's mom is literary agent
For non fiction 
Reading thru ur email now
Kelly doesn't know Georgia, but that's a good lead 
oh yea i don’t know her! she seems cool
She's ok haha
idk who people are anymore, she’s friends with coker twins??
I don't know haha
man i don’t even know
ooh man i’m rereading this email, the tone of this email is all over the place, thanks for looking at it 
She was more so friends with people like Aerienne and Ryan then Coker twins. People who lived off campus and tried to Tune out Pomona more. She was always nice in the times I've known her, but she also has gone on a bunch of sojourns to travel on cross country road trips 
So who knows what vibe she is on now haha
lol so have we 
Yea what's wrong w cross country road trips 
That's once of those things j wanted 
i had a long convo with my friend, i might actually for real do this cross country moto trip with carolyn
to move to ny in spring
then sell the moto in nyc 
No I mean to live in a van and disappear for long periods. Nothing wrong with that I'm just not sure what she's doing now as she's not the easiest to casually keep track of 
Also you are both quick to get defensive on that one haha
oh lol. at least she’s not that person who literally works for the cia now
I'm the one who lived in a van for eighth grade here, chill 
Haha
that’s ok, i’m listening to operation ivy on college radio, applying to this nonsensical job
￼got this today ☺️
Dude Tor is permanently closing their unsolicited submissions 😟 
Hello friends
Georgia is questionable for other reasons 
But vans are creepy
Also kelly 
Shouldn't u mentioned how popular that last article was?
yes!
i don’t have exact metrics, is that ok?
Yea should use some sort of metric 
Or even quote your editor or something I don't know
Also what's w me and long distance 
Women only want to date me if they can escape 
lmao
i think it’s a package deal with the gypsy curse
This is the curse ! Haha
it makes you seem more romantic i think???
Fml
i’ll never forget the time that we went to a BODEGA and the girl looked at you with dreamy eyes and started giggling
i was like ???? i thought bodega employees were immune to all charms
Never happened lol
this is True
I'm starting to crush more easily 
Maybe it's just fatigue 
it was in your distant phase
Or maybe my heart is more raw 
/ open?
when you were alienating ppl on tinder left and right
Alien nation 
yeah you’re def crushing on ppl rn
i crush on ppl when i’m confused and tired
I saw becca 4.5 times in a week
9 days. Only twice under make out circumstances 
how often is she in town
Not often 
hey so other than adding metrics, is my email ok?
idk i think long distance things that are clearly defined are really nice sometimes? but also can be heart rending
Yea
I'm still not sure about cibernetics 
i feel like it occupies the romantic space in my brain so that i can be more open to other stuff where i live
As a word for Julia 
ok
Is that dumb of me?
no
most people who shared/read my article were tech aspies 
Dude I need to hustle way harder. 
When u email her I'll send a follow up email too
i’m only hustling so hard because homelessness is so close i can taste it
a couple who is our same age and looks/dresses similarly with a similar looking pit bull moved into a tent down the street recently 
Damn 
my mom is on that brink too 
i really gotta sell some books, bro
i got nothing but my stories and my broken down body 
I could be wrong 
Actually maybe I am 
about what?
But I feel like a people's history of dogs 
Is more solid in its pitch form 
But memoir I guess sells better
yeah it’s way more solid, i’ve thought about it way harder
Was wondering if u should switch the order
that’s a good suggestion, i’m gonna do that
also people’s history of dogs is what i’m working on at goddard, with structure and support 
memoir is just ☁️
bc it sells, idk. some people get really excited about my idiot dog stories, stories about individual dogs, funny dogs, idiot dogs, scary dogs 
so i’m gonna try to sell it 
Yea, that's not as strong 
Julia is our age 
should i leave it out?
Same kinda background 
But the rich version 
yeah it’s all kinda lame
the memoir
i think memoirs are generally lame
Just give it to her straight 
No don't cut it out 
Just maybe tighten / shorten? And make it go second?
got it! 
Right?
yes! agree 100%
any other insight?
I'm about to go to dinner 
ok
Can reread post? Send a new draft?
will do!
￼
Are you watching? 
Also I miss your voice and texts and thoughts. How are you?
Yeah where'd u go tom 
Watching rn
Blood boiling 
Hillary just made clear she's the candidate opposed to "over mass incarceration" but of course it's okay to have "just enough mass incarceration"
Yesssss Bernie 
￼
I wish we could clutch each other in our simmer hatred and revulsion. 
I knowwwww
I need that 
Bernie is such an anti-Semite 
I know I love him 
sad he caved about his liaison 
He didn't quite cave 
He just suspended her 
Oh yea
I know her
From ifnotnow
Wild
She was there in the beginning. Close w Naomi and Max
Respect 
Hillary can't commit to ever saying  no to netenyahu. Also was she wack? Being close to Naomi and max can be super j street-y which I could give a flying fuck about 
Naomi is not j street y at all
She's communication director of JVP
She's really far left 
Max is less so obviously 
Oh Naomi is the girl who was Crushing on you who's a baby 
Simone is kinda wack personally speaking but yea still respect 
Yea
Precocious youngster 
Naomi seems cool if too easily shockable 
Tho I guess I'm shocking these days 
Hahaha yea she's a little organizer normy
I'm at a bar w 100 ppl literally screaming 
Everything Hillary speaks 
Lollll
I've removed my baby left -proof cap I had while at Pomona 
Amazing! Wish we were there 
Yea we are alone in apartment just groaning 
Stopped rounding my edges for sensitive leftist respectability politics and gone full hotep (tho not in a regressive we were kings forms of masculinity)
How'd the crowd go for the end?
The crowd was screaming Bernie Bernie Bernie 
Ear splitting 
Lots of ditmas middle aged folks 
Freakin
Everyone I invited including genna and her friend left because it was too loud lol
Lollll
I wonder where Bernie is goin after hrs
U know that afterparty is killer 
Hahaha 
I can only imagine 
Good scene tho
He might be my celeb crush 
Oh yea he's my 3rd grandpa
Only still living RIP
How are y'all feeling 
I miss having people around to debate debates
we’re ok i guess idk i smashed up my computer real bad and had to redirect my whole life in the past few days so my body just gave out and I’m sick
We are doing alright 
Plotted to stay in academia and now have shifted to plotting to not 
who knows what we’ll do idk
Yeah wdk
just trying to be ourselves in the face of violent forces trying to get us not to 
I mean I don't know what I really am any more. Just an opinionated side line guy 
Hello friends 
Being almost at the end of a sorta evil mfa program is completely confusing 
Being ourselves is so beautiful tho so it's gonna prevail 
idk i was just watching a bunch of pregnancy videos??? idk where my head is at 
Hahaha
I just consume Bernie media constantly 
my friend just had a baby and I’ve been hanging out with them a lot and thinking about all the things that aren’t in place that absolutely have to be in place before i can do that 
I miss activism and I am trying to heal my relationship to art and teaching... I'll need this summer 
Yea I'm so far 
yea the summer is gonna be good for you 
From being able to be in a relationship
At all
Haha
Yes. I hope.
￼
it’s weird to process the disintegration of this house i thought i would have to raise kids in 
my grandparents bought it like 40 yrs ago to be a multigenerational homestead 
and then the dog is slowly dying but i have no idea when 
idk! life is weird 
:( 
Life is so bizarre 
it’s ok we are both working on some really good stuff and cool projects 
and we have great friends 😊 
True! I wish the world were smaller tho
That's the story of my life 
Me 2 
we have a lot to look forward to and a lot to dread 
i’ve been invited to do professional edibles stuff tho! the chef i work with is entering a contest and she wants me to assist 
Yeah that should be cool!
Meanwhile I'm not sure about any of my shit, except that everything shows I'm some super strange radical and carrying some sorts of traditions in me I can't name or understand 
g h o s t s 
I guess mostly just out of my era 
This guy already beat me to this era 
￼
who’s that ??
Carlos Nino 
oh my gosh he’s so dang cute/cool 
((almost as cool / cute as you ))
Lollll who is that 
Amazing and cute 
I have to sleep now tho talk to u all soon 
nite
Radio Dj record producer musician 
Guy who helped put on the dilla tribute we went to back in the day 
okay. had a depressive crash for a moment earlier today thanks to not sleeping
i mean also because right before we left, released from lock down, we went around and everyone said what they are doing this summer so i got to trigger all my typical shit about how i make no sense if judged in terms of most other people
i mean i also just didn’t arrange anything for this summer and had the things i went for all fall through
 :/ but you're traveling! 
Right?
a little
You're not going to jake's right?
i have to bust my ass to get some articles/papers done too
yeah
What did he say?
Yea but busting ass is the name of the game 
i haven’t emailed him yet, i just got my dad to confirm it was definitely happening
Get your brilliant shit out 
it’s not brilliant shit, it’s academic publications
Yea I don't really wanna go either 
I can't really afford a throwaway ticket 
Are they even my people anymore? Who knows anymore
i mean i am always up for hanging with jake and shwin and jemel, but literally no one else there will probably be worth it
Yea
Tigist 
and it’s an expensive way to hang out with them
Can't remember anyone else
i honestly think i’d be more into the vibe of jewels’ wedding out of the two
*jemel’s
But Tigist is too bougie for me too
also making it in chicago at 4th of july is also such a dick move
Yea me too for sure
And David and toms bdays
Idk it seems like a miserable time 
yeah i know
Lol yea 
Maybe I'll make something up hahs
Haha
Like an elaborate plot
Just come to New Mexico instead 
I'd love to hopefully 
It's such a healing place 
*honestly 
I luv it 
I also wanted to fly to the bay 
For no reason really 
Hm the bay is a bit of a hellscape now 
I've never been to your hometown actually 
At least to me haha. Outside perspective might make it not so 
New chance the rapper record is solid btw
Smoke break....... But back on track.... 
Yes definitely 
I'm feeling this gospel 
yeah it’s pretty good
Yea I don't know I just need to get out of town but Chicago is not the ticket
and not for a wedding
Summer friends too
(The song)
Yeah summer friends! 🦀💜
Are you coming to Coney Island with us 
Oh yea 
I live so close! 
Watching a weird dan g recommended anime film rn actually 
Awesome!! 
Close for me too I'm stayin in mid wood the whole time I'm there 
Catsittin
Wicked city
No way!!! 
OOHHH! Love wicked city!! 
Whose cat?
Yeah that's why I wanna spend quality ⏰ w Genna 
Julian! Robins friend 
Oh awesome! 
Which stop?
By the church q
Sorry church f/g
Whoa super close 👌🏼
i wrote a poem about how i feel 
"a trash island in the middle of the atlantic
made of international garbage
little bits of data from all over the world
not enough to be a land mass
just enough to be a nuisance"
I dig it, deep
lmao
is all poetry a prank
￼
Derek Walcott ishhhh
Haha yea I hope 
Yes 
Derek Walcott is pranking the right ppl tho 
can i prank some ppl with poetry 
uncle’s poem for father’s day 
￼
￼
being a black genius is a path worthy of suicide 
FUKKKK
FUCKKKKKKKKKKK PATRIARCHY
Lol
Is Ashwin one of those dudes ?
Also why did he call her post "whinny"
Like a pony 
lmao 
Im lost 
i mean why the fuck are they having the wedding in chicago?>
It's very odd that Ashwin tried to bro me over liking her post 
Haven't heard from him in a while lol
i mean! it’s crazy
Oh hey
Difficulty doesn't apply to privileged bros like me it just belongs to crazy people like u and Patricia #subtext
that’s the most gaslampy thing 
i think i’m done with neoliberal
s
yeah over a LIKE
this is clearly some pretend casual sign of some deeper mission happening here
i think i can only hang with ppl who are riding on the back of this struggle bus tbh
also when patricia says something like that on Facebook i honestly assume there’s something more going on
they’re gonna spend all weekend talking shit about her 
so it sounds like there is
bc it’s the  most exciting thing in their boring neoliberal lives
i mean we can both be implicated in team patricia apparently because i also face booked with her
this is the “whiny crazy girl” 
"hi robin, i just got a really sweet message from tom. thanks for thinking of me through this strange and albeit painful time with broken friendships fueled by white male privilege at the expense of a woman of color.

i hope you're doing well. if you're in socal, i'll be there in the fall and would love to catch up with you."
Nice message ! 
She's also into cool shit
Her work sounds cool I mean 
yeah I mean she did some immature shit around Jake way back when, but time has clearly vindicated her honestly
i mean she’s rad
she’s doing cool work and still living a life around righteous struggle and Jake is at Harvard
I'm sure she was shitty to jake
marrying a Harvard monster
I saw it
But I'm sure he had his flaws too
And dating is hard 
yeah i did too. i was there. 
I don't judge people it's not like she torched his car
I mean I do
with him in new orleans
But try not to lol
Yea 
But also
she did some fucked up things back then, but she was in her twenties and dealing with real shit. 
I would be so pissed to see Jake and shwin there 
Careering off of some other community 
i would also be so pissed
i’m still kinda pissed
Vietnamese to be exact 
Yea 
yeah i mean the thing is she played herself
They went way too hard 
In that space 
It wasn't there's 
but the core of what she was upset about is pretty sure
Theirs 
i’m really not into dissecting her behavior as a 21 year old from a working class background who was panicked about finding work after liberal arts college tbh, robin
oh i just got real life chastised lmao
sorry robin
She was really difficult but that doesn't mean she wasn't hurt by Jake too
And she is probably referring more to Jemel and the extended crew as well who knows 
Whatever idk
there are no perfect victims in a relationship
but this shit happening this way now is deeply fucked up
Yea I've been a bad partner and people have been bad to me it all comes out in the wash 
Minus torching cars 
and also it’s weird because Jake didn’t make new orleans his home clearly
It was the most privileged shit ever 
i mean its one thing to make a place your home and become part of it
but all the time he was there he already had a plan out
a grant, than a thesis, then a deferred harvard admission
paid for because he did a “social justice summer” that gets you money for grad school
i was terrible to robin but he’s never been petty about it 
and honestly it’s complicated to come to terms with what it means to have a community and radical politics while going through Pomona. then she had extra pressure because she was so bought into that gunner lifestyle of pomona
Omg 
yeah that shit really sucks you up
You used the p word 
petty?
like i mostly don’t hate on patricia for then, i mostly just say she put herself in such a horrible situation because it was her community and she was only there for a week
Pomona 
I’m sorry i abandoned you in that wedding
Yea w/e never again 
Lost hundreds of dollars 
Oh I meant 
i mean i lost over a 100 as well
Never will I go to some wedding again 
U can flake on me 
I don't mind
and neither of us can afford this shit
Prefer u come but I feel u 
ugh i can’t believe u have to go to chicago
change your flight! come visit us instead
but honestly this chicago location feels like a passive aggressive dig at Patricia and her community there honestly. it’s hard for me to understand it as anything not messy
i feel like this wasn’t jakes move either
but Nicole
like Jake is not innocent, but i don’t think he’s would try to force people this way
i still believe in him being still fundamentally a goofy bay boy, even though he has is extreme hungry ghost
Can you change your flight? 
One 
Their 
usually no
maybe?
I’m still reeling on this being such a big thing
honestly
it’s the ultimate return to classist tensions from the P-word but writ large and in such a dumb way. it also vindicates all my worst hotep feelings about yopros and weddings
i guess we can be happy we’ve been disinvesting in the boys over the years, cuz this signals some next phase that might be so much more toxic than even our worst moments with them so far. 
i just like trolling them at dinner tables
Yea what is hotep tho
Also is weird if I post either of these on Instagram ? And say #bds? 
HAHAHAHAHAHAHAHHAHAAHAHAHAHHA
yes
￼
￼
I already shared these w robin so sorry 
we can start a #bds bros
I think lechaim intifada is too real for social media 
yeah that context was necessary, i remember these but still thought you meant shwin text
Hahaha
I can't 
Maybe in thousands of years 
no you shouldn’t 
Jk just playing bro
it’s perfect for twitter
also let’s just be as radical as we want tbh
yeah you should rep those designers and artists
i’m literally done apologizing 
i’m a goddamn angry communist and i wanna yell 
yeah it’s not getting us jobs to very thinly veil our politics and support for more radical artists
and it’s not keeping us safe
yeah let’s just be radical we’re not being helped by being cowardly about it
Ok posted 
W/e
Yea I am looking for teaching gigs on other campuses 
Weird new phase 
yeah i mean that could be hurt
Maybe found a community college to exploit me 
Part of Cuny 
City tech 
but you are already out i don’t think you can take back it now anyways
ooh city tech
What do u mean, robin? 
Referring to my Instagram post or city tech?
you could lose jobs for being anti-israel
i don’t think it’s worth succumbing to that fear tho. i think it’s a losing fight, even with Cuomo backing it
Yea it's true but I'm not at such a visible point where it matters 
Although I am going to a conference in Chicago next March for this radical Jews of color / Sephardi / mizrahi Jews group through JVP. Would be cool to stay involved that way.
Thru art 
People on this Facebook group talking about ladino like it's obvious 
To talk about in relation to decolonization 
Weird 
that sounds great 
Yea, who knows. :) testing waters  
ladino is definitely connected. honestly you should avoid white centric spaces for this part of your journey
like don’t deny your whiteness, but particularly avoid places where guilty white jew liberals are trying to “unlearn” or “complicate” their whiteness
“as Jews”
Fire
I mean true 
But fire works too :)
My new question is how to make an audience for my work 
When there is only this tiny audience of woke Jews who get it
fire
you will build an audience for your work the more you are unapologetically yourself
people will emerge that you can’t see right now
the more you are out there and accessible and most importantly, honest
not veiled
yeah worry about your ancestors and your collaborators
worry about which ghosts you are inviting in and honoring them and working with them
True and true 
How was it seeing dan btw
￼
“in order to produce more it is necessary to know more”
i love dan
we are both intense tauruses 
Oh shit! I dig tauruses 
ooh i love that poster
What is this animal farm 
yea our birthdays are like 2 days apart!
lol
#animalism
Like me and David margolis 
yep
and me and your dad
yes ! 
crazy!!
anyway me and dan get off on hating men and capitalism together
it is really wonderful
Yes! To everything said 
she’s coming to LA and we’re gonna go to a rave 
Love it 
Entering scifi brainstorm 
I think I am finally doing video work w my filmmaker friend in August. 
yes we are definitely past lives connected
Speculative ads for evil products lol
Yea she's deep 
oh  nice!!!
yeah that project is really worth going back to working on
💜
Reading this book I'm struck by how many people take it literally 
Like, how sad it is that animals are enslaved 
Lmao 
That's absurd 
If anything it kind of mocks them 
Still not over Ashwin gaslighting Patricia and sorta me
Feel like that's a part of my relationship since I know him 
￼
It's so nuts
The gas lighting 
Do u know this writer http://monkeybicycle.net/april-5-1991/
(Scroll to bottom for bio I guess) 
￼
I don't know that woman no... Is she cool?
idk the story is ok
Did you see the final version of vicarious 
I haven't just curious if you have 
oh did she post it?
She didn't 
oh then yeah
didn’t we talk about this?
oh wait i haven’t seen final final
Yea we talked about an other version I think 
I have $10 on my debit card 
And I tried to get soup and food and it was too much
Then the number appeared on the register they told me I had only $10
Wtf? How do cafes have that info now 
It's crazy 
They are all watching us and shaming us
Wtf 
They shouldn't know that 
This happens to me all the time 
That's crazy right?
I hate that they know!!!!!
I'm very confused 
Where did u try to buy 
Some bougie plCe w good ingredients hoping to get better soon. But that was crazy 
That's nuts 
Oy
Sending money stacks of love 💸
this is another helpful writing thing http://lithub.com/why-you-should-aim-for-100-rejections-a-year/
Already on track 
Such a dumb process 
i get rejected a lot
￼
This guys bio 
Wtf
I hate everything run
Rn
i feel like that too when a stranger tells me i’m poor!!
it fucks me up for weeks
Haha
Yea. 
not joking 
 Yea. Idk
today i am too broke to do laundry
I'm supposed to be reading at some bookstore tonight 
oh wow! which one
And I have a fever and now like dollars in the bank 
Topos 
Books
you’re never gonna get better if u don’t rest!
but yeah i think if you have a reading you have to go 
I'm gonna eat an avocado with garlic cloves take a nap and then head over 
can u guys get a 3rd roommate now that you’re not in school anymore
sorry if this is unhelpful suggest
I don't think we want to haha
haha it’s a kinda cramped apartment, a 3rd would definitely shift lifestyle
I just need to focus on making money and not spending $500 on going to some yuppie wedding 
ugh god yes
Conference feel like the academic equivalent. Glad I'm at least gonna be done with them by end of this year 
Seriously I'm an idiot 
When it comes to money 
I need to fix that 
i spend morally instead of intelligently
if i am with friends or a friend needs money or resources i give it away
and when i don’t have money i just don’t have money
and i tell people “I don’t have money right now” lol
Yea 
Also I wanna cook at home 
u have a nice kitchen
But genna is obviously not able to support that culture 
So I usually don't but I'm gonna 
oh you can’t cook at home does it trigger her?
Which is why I am feeling a little lovesick wish I could sincerely date again and find a nice person who is at my wavelength 
Yea sometimes it does 
But also sometimes she does weird ghoulish stuff in the kitchen 
That scares me away 
No judgment 
But it is actually hard to be around 
i feel u 
￼
￼
Think this is ok for an Instagram teaser. Madeleine drew it.
yes!
Yeah it looks great 
Thanks guys 
this is really beautifully written http://www.newyorker.com/books/page-turner/a-decade-after-prison-a-poet-studies-for-the-bar-exam
Tom is this a real thing 
￼
￼
￼
￼
I appreciate this. My experience is different and obviously she's describing a real sentiment that I know as well. But even tho Israel was founded on displacement and violence 
Some of the hope and possibility was real
Maybe before 67 but even after 
But racism and deepening colonialism and many other things made it possible. 
But I don't 100 percent believe that 1948 was original sin
I think the occupation gaza and West Bank was the major problem 
In 1967
But yea we were all raised on a lie
But Israelis were too and Palestinians in maybe equal measure. 
So #humanfail 
Something new is due. I still believe Jews need(ed) self determination like any other group. Just not this as it is
And that doesn't have to be Zionism is such. Sorry rant! 
Made it *impossible 
Ok hello!
Ok I loved this! Thank you for sharing this 
Complex stuff. 
But yea. The scarier stuff I heard growing up 
Was rabbis reading the news of suicide bombings and creating demons out of Palestinians and the other / barbarian kind of thing  
But I was only critical after occupation after college
And only because acquainted w Israel's fundamental faults in college, even tho I was more left than anyone on Israeli in hs 
Only after college? What was the turning point?
So consciousness on this in our communities is not super old 
Honestly becoming close w Palestinians changed how I saw it
Yeah that's makes 1000% sense 
And made me more radical on it. Before i was like israel is fucked up but it can be fixed
When I heard about people's family's never being able to go to a place I could do vacation at, people who were more from there than I was 
I felt it
Yes liane but also others
I read Island in full for my favorite poetess teacher at a reading last night and she said it was really good. So small goals.
Next time post nationalist revolution to free Palestine and free the soul of the Jews involved 
;)
Amazing news about the reading 
I first bonded over Jemel talking about israel at Pomona, which is funny thing to remember 
Ariana reines I bet she'd do a blurb f only I could publish anything 
Yea me 2
Jemel was an influence 
I also influenced him I hope. Since even then the criticism could get ugly 
Talking to leftists in high school who were critical of israel kept me a bit more liberal on the issue because so many of the wack socialist critiques were knee jerk and not really coming from a Palestinian solidarity place as much as just a anti-Israeli or any thoughtfulness
I didn't grow up around I
Israel 
*zionism, so learning about israel for me was more a feeling being half Jewish that what I wanted to believe about my Jewish side being better than my white redneck side wasn't actually as true. It was a frustration that so many Jews now wanted to adopt an occupier mindset that I knew was part of my southern white side.
It will be nice when one day to be Jewish does not have to connect so quickly to Israel 
I predict major white Jewish flight 
When Israel changes 
Maybe the Russians will stay. But mostly brown Jews and other poor Jews (ultra orthodox / Hasidic)
Will stay 
Yeah the nonjewish fascist Russians will probably stay 
This would require an intervention or a civil war 
Honestly many of the brown Jews are the most fascist 
For reasons that we can maybe understand 
But mostly just rich people and Western Europeans will leave 
Well Russians directly form former soviet bloc aren't white in the same way 
They aren't like several generations removed Ashkenazis Russians 
Yea they aren't 
Black cops are the most fascist so I get that 
This is all interesting to me thank you both 
It's just a trip that white supremacy in israel led them to bring in Russians who weren't even Jewish and now can support Avigdor Lieberman and be a lot of the shocks troops domestically 
Yea it's all amazing 
Who knew things could be so bad 
Planet has issues 
To switch topics I feel very weird bc today is the last day of the toast and Hillary Clinton wrote a piece about how valuable they are 
For "ladies to get together" 
Like fuck you you're a billionaire and apparently a regular reader, you could've just given them money to stay afloat 
"Gross. White feminism is entering a real extra
Phase "
http://the-toast.net/2016/07/01/a-note-on-the-toast/
I just feel weird about everything 
In the world 
I don't feel safe anywhere 
I don't have enough money to live and I don't think I ever will 
￼
"I came close to replying to
Her tweet not to assume everyone can easily bail out and find a ""real job"" in this economy "
It's so frustrating how much of our media are rich ppl who assume Everyone always has an easily accomplished fall back plan 