ten weaɾ te ɡold at, if tat wiʝ mobe eɾ;
  if iou kan bounse ʝɡ, bounse foɾ eɾ too,
tiʝ ʃe kɾi "lobeɾ, ɡold-atted, ʝɡ-bounsinɡ lobeɾ,
  i must abe iou!"

                    --tomas paɾke d'inbiʝjeɾs





t͡ʃapteɾ 1



in mi iounxeɾ and moɾe bulneɾable ieaɾs mi fateɾ ɡabe me some adbise
tat i'be been tuɾninɡ obeɾ in mi mind ebeɾ sinse.

"wenebeɾ iou feel like kɾitisisinɡ ani one," e told me, "xust
ɾemembeɾ tat aʝ te people in tʝs woɾld aben't ad te adbantaxes
tat iou'be ad."

e didn't sai ani moɾe but we'be alwais been unuswaʝi kommunikatibe
in a ɾeseɾbed wai, and i undeɾstood tat e meant a ɡɾeat deal moɾe
tan tat. in konsekense i'm inklined to ɾeseɾbe aʝ xudɡments,
a abit tat as opened up mani kuɾjous natuɾes to me and also
made me te biktim of not a few beteɾan boɾes. te abnoɾmal mind
is kikk to detekt and attat͡ʃ itself to tʝs kaliti wen it
appeaɾs in a noɾmal peɾson, and so it kame about tat in koʝexe i
was unxust͡ɬi akkused of beinɡ a politisian, bekause i was pɾibi to te
sekɾet ɡɾjefs of wild, unknown men. most of te konfidenses weɾe
unsouɡt--fɾekent͡ɬi i abe feiɡned sleep, pɾeokkupatjon, oɾ a ostile
lebiti wen i ɾealised bi some unmistakable siɡn tat an intimate
ɾebelatjon was kibeɾinɡ on te oɾison--foɾ te intimate ɾebelatjons
of iounɡ men oɾ at least te teɾms in wʝt͡ʃ tei ekspɾess tem aɾe
uswaʝi plaxiaɾistik and mared bi obbjous suppɾessjons. ɾeseɾbinɡ
xudɡments is a matteɾ of infinite ope. i am stiʝ a litt͡ɬe afɾaid of
missinɡ sometʝnɡ if i foɾxet tat, as mi fateɾ snobbiʃli suɡxested,
and i snobbiʃli ɾepeat, a sense of te fundamental desensies is
paɾseʝed out unekaʝi at biɾt.

and, afteɾ boastinɡ tʝs wai of mi toleɾanse, i kome to te admissjon
tat it as a limit. kondukt mai be founded on te aɾd ɾokk oɾ te wet
maɾʃes but afteɾ a seɾtain point i don't kaɾe wat it's founded on.
wen i kame bakk fɾom te east last autumn i felt tat i wanted te
woɾld to be in unifoɾm and at a soɾt of moɾal attentjon foɾebeɾ; i
wanted no moɾe ɾjotous ekskuɾsjons wit pɾibilexed ɡlimpses into te
wman eaɾt. onli ɡatsbi, te man wo xibes ʝs name to tʝs book, was
eksempt fɾom mi ɾeaktjon--ɡatsbi wo ɾepɾesented ebeɾitʝnɡ foɾ wʝt͡ʃ i
abe an unaffekted skoɾn. if peɾsonaliti is an unbɾoken seɾjes of
suksessful xestuɾes, ten teɾe was sometʝnɡ ɡoɾxeous about ʝm, some
eiɡtened sensitibiti to te pɾomises of life, as if e weɾe ɾelated
to one of tose intɾikate mat͡ʃines tat ɾexisteɾ eaɾtkakes ten
tousand miles awai. tʝs ɾesponsibeness ad notʝnɡ to do wit tat
flabbi impɾessjonabiliti wʝt͡ʃ is diɡnifjed undeɾ te name of te
"kɾeatibe tempeɾament"--it was an ekstɾaoɾdinaɾi xift foɾ ope, a ɾomantik
ɾeadiness sut͡ʃ as i abe nebeɾ found in ani oteɾ peɾson and wʝt͡ʃ it
is not likeli i ʃaʝ ebeɾ find aɡain. no--ɡatsbi tuɾned out aʝ ɾiɡt
at te end; it is wat pɾeied on ɡatsbi, wat foul dust floated in te
wake of ʝs dɾeams tat tempoɾaɾili klosed out mi inteɾest in te
aboɾtibe sorows and ʃoɾt-winded elatjons of men.


mi famili abe been pɾominent, weʝ-to-do people in tʝs middle-westeɾn
siti foɾ tɾee xeneɾatjons. te karawais aɾe sometʝnɡ of a klan and we
abe a tɾaditjon tat we'ɾe dessended fɾom te dukes of bukkleut͡ʃ, but te
aktwal foundeɾ of mi line was mi ɡɾandfateɾ's bɾoteɾ wo kame eɾe in
fifti-one, sent a substitute to te sibil waɾ and staɾted te wolesale
aɾdwaɾe business tat mi fateɾ karjes on todai.

i nebeɾ saw tʝs ɡɾeat-unkle but i'm supposed to look like ʝm--wit
spesial ɾefeɾense to te ɾateɾ aɾd-boiled paintinɡ tat anɡs in
fateɾ's offise. i ɡɾadwated fɾom new aben in 1915, xust a kaɾteɾ of a
sentuɾi afteɾ mi fateɾ, and a litt͡ɬe lateɾ i paɾtisipated in tat
delaied teutonik miɡɾatjon known as te ɡɾeat waɾ. i enxoied te
kounteɾ-ɾaid so toɾouɡli tat i kame bakk ɾest͡ɬess. instead of beinɡ
te waɾm senteɾ of te woɾld te middle-west now seemed like te
ɾaɡxed edxe of te unibeɾse--so i desided to ɡo east and leaɾn te bond
business. ebeɾibodi i knew was in te bond business so i supposed it
kould suppoɾt one moɾe sinɡle man. aʝ mi aunts and unkles talked it
obeɾ as if tei weɾe t͡ʃoosinɡ a pɾep-st͡ʃool foɾ me and finaʝi said,
"wi--ie-es" wit beɾi ɡɾabe, esitant fases. fateɾ aɡɾeed to finanse
me foɾ a ieaɾ and afteɾ baɾjous delais i kame east, peɾmanent͡ɬi, i
touɡt, in te spɾinɡ of twenti-two.

te pɾaktikal tʝnɡ was to find ɾooms in te siti but it was a waɾm
season and i ad xust left a kountɾi of wide lawns and fɾjendli tɾees,
so wen a iounɡ man at te offise suɡxested tat we take a ouse
toxeteɾ in a kommutinɡ town it sounded like a ɡɾeat idea. e found
te ouse, a weateɾ beaten kaɾdboaɾd bunɡalow at eiɡti a mont, but
at te last minute te fiɾm oɾdeɾed ʝm to waʃinɡton and i went out
to te kountɾi alone. i ad a doɡ, at least i ad ʝm foɾ a few dais
until e ɾan awai, and an old dodxe and a finniʃ woman wo made mi bed
and kooked bɾeakfast and mutteɾed finniʃ wisdom to eɾself obeɾ te
elektɾik stobe.

it was loneli foɾ a dai oɾ so until one moɾninɡ some man, moɾe ɾesent͡ɬi
aribed tan i, stopped me on te ɾoad.

"ow do iou xet to west eɡɡ biʝaxe?" e asked elplessli.

i told ʝm. and as i walked on i was loneli no lonxeɾ. i was a ɡide, a
patfindeɾ, an oɾixinal sett͡ɬeɾ. e ad kaswaʝi konfered on me te
fɾeedom of te neiɡboɾood.

and so wit te sunʃine and te ɡɾeat buɾsts of leabes ɡɾowinɡ on te
tɾees--xust as tʝnɡs ɡɾow in fast mobjes--i ad tat familjaɾ
konbiktjon tat life was bexinninɡ obeɾ aɡain wit te summeɾ.

teɾe was so mut͡ʃ to ɾead foɾ one tʝnɡ and so mut͡ʃ fine ealt to be
puʝed down out of te iounɡ bɾeat-xibinɡ aiɾ. i bouɡt a dosen
bolumes on bankinɡ and kɾedit and inbestment sekuɾitjes and tei stood
on mi ʃelf in ɾed and ɡold like new monei fɾom te mint, pɾomisinɡ to
unfold te ʃininɡ sekɾets tat onli midas and moɾɡan and maesenas
knew. and i ad te ʝɡ intentjon of ɾeadinɡ mani oteɾ books besides.
i was ɾateɾ liteɾaɾi in koʝexe--one ieaɾ i wɾote a seɾjes of beɾi
solemn and obbjous editoɾjals foɾ te "iale news"--and now i was ɡoinɡ
to bɾinɡ bakk aʝ sut͡ʃ tʝnɡs into mi life and bekome aɡain tat most
limited of aʝ spesialists, te "weʝ-ɾounded man." tʝs isn't xust an
epiɡɾam--life is mut͡ʃ moɾe suksessfuʝi looked at fɾom a sinɡle window,
afteɾ aʝ.

it was a matteɾ of t͡ʃanse tat i ʃould abe ɾented a ouse in one of
te stɾanxest kommunitjes in noɾt ameɾika. it was on tat slendeɾ
ɾjotous island wʝt͡ʃ ekstends itself dwe east of new ioɾk and weɾe
teɾe aɾe, amonɡ oteɾ natuɾal kuɾjositjes, two unuswal foɾmatjons of
land. twenti miles fɾom te siti a paiɾ of enoɾmous eɡɡs, identikal in
kontouɾ and sepaɾated onli bi a kouɾtesi bai, xut out into te most
domestikated bodi of salt wateɾ in te westeɾn emispeɾe, te ɡɾeat
wet baɾniaɾd of lonɡ island sound. tei aɾe not peɾfekt obals--like te
eɡɡ in te kolumbus stoɾi tei aɾe bot kɾuʃed flat at te kontakt
end--but teiɾ pisikal ɾesemblanse must be a souɾse of peɾpetwal
konfusjon to te ɡwʝs tat fli obeɾead. to te winɡless a moɾe
arestinɡ penomenon is teiɾ dissimilaɾiti in ebeɾi paɾtikulaɾ ekssept
ʃape and sise.

i libed at west eɡɡ, te--weʝ, te less faʃjonable of te two, touɡ
tʝs is a most supeɾfisial taɡ to ekspɾess te bisare and not a litt͡ɬe
sinisteɾ kontɾast between tem. mi ouse was at te beɾi tip of te
eɡɡ, onli fifti iaɾds fɾom te sound, and skeesed between two wxe
plases tat ɾented foɾ twelbe oɾ fifteen tousand a season. te one on
mi ɾiɡt was a kolossal affaiɾ bi ani standaɾd--it was a faktwal
imitatjon of some ôtel de biʝe in noɾmandi, wit a toweɾ on one side,
spankinɡ new undeɾ a tʝn beaɾd of ɾaw ibi, and a maɾble swimminɡ pool
and moɾe tan foɾti akɾes of lawn and ɡaɾden. it was ɡatsbi's mansjon.
oɾ ɾateɾ, as i didn't know mɾ. ɡatsbi it was a mansjon inabited bi
a xent͡ɬeman of tat name. mi own ouse was an eie-soɾe, but it was a
smaʝ eie-soɾe, and it ad been obeɾlooked, so i ad a bjew of te
wateɾ, a paɾtjal bjew of mi neiɡboɾ's lawn, and te konsolinɡ
pɾoksimiti of miʝjonaiɾes--aʝ foɾ eiɡti doʝaɾs a mont.

akɾoss te kouɾtesi bai te wʝte palases of faʃjonable east eɡɡ
ɡlitteɾed alonɡ te wateɾ, and te ʝstoɾi of te summeɾ ɾeaʝi bexins
on te ebeninɡ i dɾobe obeɾ teɾe to abe dinneɾ wit te tom
but͡ʃanans. daisi was mi sekond kousin onse ɾemobed and i'd known tom
in koʝexe. and xust afteɾ te waɾ i spent two dais wit tem in
t͡ʃikaɡo.

eɾ wsband, amonɡ baɾjous pisikal akkompliʃments, ad been one of
te most poweɾful ends tat ebeɾ plaied footbaʝ at new aben--a
natjonal fiɡwɾe in a wai, one of tose men wo ɾeat͡ʃ sut͡ʃ an akute
limited eksseʝense at twenti-one tat ebeɾitʝnɡ afteɾwaɾd saboɾs of
anti-klimaks. ʝs famili weɾe enoɾmousli wealti--eben in koʝexe ʝs
fɾeedom wit monei was a matteɾ foɾ ɾepɾoat͡ʃ--but now e'd left t͡ʃikaɡo
and kome east in a faʃjon tat ɾateɾ took iouɾ bɾeat awai: foɾ
instanse e'd bɾouɡt down a stɾinɡ of polo ponjes fɾom lake foɾest.
it was aɾd to ɾealise tat a man in mi own xeneɾatjon was wealti
enouɡ to do tat.

wi tei kame east i don't know. tei ad spent a ieaɾ in fɾanse, foɾ no
paɾtikulaɾ ɾeason, and ten dɾifted eɾe and teɾe unɾestfuʝi weɾebeɾ
people plaied polo and weɾe ɾit͡ʃ toxeteɾ. tʝs was a peɾmanent mobe,
said daisi obeɾ te telepone, but i didn't beljebe it--i ad no siɡt
into daisi's eaɾt but i felt tat tom would dɾift on foɾebeɾ seekinɡ
a litt͡ɬe wistfuʝi foɾ te dɾamatik tuɾbulense of some irekobeɾable
footbaʝ ɡame.

and so it appened tat on a waɾm windi ebeninɡ i dɾobe obeɾ to east
eɡɡ to see two old fɾjends wom i skaɾseli knew at aʝ. teiɾ ouse was
eben moɾe elaboɾate tan i ekspekted, a t͡ʃeeɾful ɾed and wʝte xeoɾxian
kolonjal mansjon obeɾlookinɡ te bai. te lawn staɾted at te beat͡ʃ
and ɾan towaɾd te fɾont dooɾ foɾ a kaɾteɾ of a mile, xumpinɡ obeɾ
sun-djals and bɾikk walks and buɾninɡ ɡaɾdens--finaʝi wen it ɾeat͡ʃed
te ouse dɾiftinɡ up te side in bɾiɡt bines as touɡ fɾom te
momentum of its ɾun. te fɾont was bɾoken bi a line of fɾent͡ʃ windows,
ɡlowinɡ now wit ɾeflekted ɡold, and wide open to te waɾm windi
afteɾnoon, and tom but͡ʃanan in ɾidinɡ klotes was standinɡ wit ʝs
leɡs apaɾt on te fɾont poɾt͡ʃ.

e ad t͡ʃanxed sinse ʝs new aben ieaɾs. now e was a stuɾdi, stɾaw aiɾed
man of tʝɾti wit a ɾateɾ aɾd mout and a supeɾsiljous manneɾ.
two ʃininɡ, aroɡant eies ad establiʃed dominanse obeɾ ʝs fase and
ɡabe ʝm te appeaɾanse of alwais leaninɡ aɡɡɾessibeli foɾwaɾd. not
eben te effeminate swank of ʝs ɾidinɡ klotes kould ʝde te enoɾmous
poweɾ of tat bodi--e seemed to fiʝ tose ɡlisteninɡ boots until e
stɾained te top lasinɡ and iou kould see a ɡɾeat pakk of muskle
ʃiftinɡ wen ʝs ʃouldeɾ mobed undeɾ ʝs tʝn koat. it was a bodi
kapable of enoɾmous lebeɾaxe--a kɾwel bodi.

ʝs speakinɡ boise, a ɡɾuff wski tenoɾ, added to te impɾessjon of
fɾaktjousness e konbeied. teɾe was a tout͡ʃ of pateɾnal kontempt in
it, eben towaɾd people e liked--and teɾe weɾe men at new aben wo ad
ated ʝs ɡwts.

"now, don't tʝnk mi opinjon on tese matteɾs is final," e seemed to
sai, "xust bekause i'm stɾonxeɾ and moɾe of a man tan iou aɾe." we
weɾe in te same senjoɾ sosieti, and wʝle we weɾe nebeɾ intimate i
alwais ad te impɾessjon tat e appɾobed of me and wanted me to like
ʝm wit some aɾʃ, defjant wistfulness of ʝs own.

we talked foɾ a few minutes on te sunni poɾt͡ʃ.

"i'be ɡot a nise plase eɾe," e said, ʝs eies flaʃinɡ about
ɾest͡ɬessli.

tuɾninɡ me aɾound bi one aɾm e mobed a bɾoad flat and alonɡ te
fɾont bista, inkludinɡ in its sweep a sunken italjan ɡaɾden, a alf
akɾe of deep punxent ɾoses and a snub-nosed motoɾ boat tat bumped
te tide off ʃoɾe.

"it belonxed to demaine te oil man." e tuɾned me aɾound aɡain,
politeli and abɾupt͡ɬi. "we'ʝ ɡo inside."

we walked tɾouɡ a ʝɡ aʝwai into a bɾiɡt ɾosi-koloɾed spase,
fɾaxileli bound into te ouse bi fɾent͡ʃ windows at eiteɾ end.
te windows weɾe axaɾ and ɡleaminɡ wʝte aɡainst te fɾeʃ ɡɾass
outside tat seemed to ɡɾow a litt͡ɬe wai into te ouse. a bɾeese
blew tɾouɡ te ɾoom, blew kuɾtains in at one end and out te oteɾ
like pale flaɡs, twistinɡ tem up towaɾd te fɾosted weddinɡ kake of
te seilinɡ--and ten ɾippled obeɾ te wine-koloɾed ɾuɡ, makinɡ a
ʃadow on it as wind does on te sea.

te onli kompleteli statjonaɾi obxekt in te ɾoom was an enoɾmous kout͡ʃ
on wʝt͡ʃ two iounɡ women weɾe bwoied up as touɡ upon an ant͡ʃoɾed
baʝoon. tei weɾe bot in wʝte and teiɾ dɾesses weɾe ɾipplinɡ and
flutteɾinɡ as if tei ad xust been blown bakk in afteɾ a ʃoɾt fliɡt
aɾound te ouse. i must abe stood foɾ a few moments listeninɡ to te
wʝp and snap of te kuɾtains and te ɡɾoan of a piktuɾe on te waʝ.
ten teɾe was a boom as tom but͡ʃanan ʃut te ɾeaɾ windows and te kauɡt
wind djed out about te ɾoom and te kuɾtains and te ɾuɡs and te two
iounɡ women baʝooned slowli to te flooɾ.

te iounxeɾ of te two was a stɾanxeɾ to me. ʃe was ekstended fuʝ lenɡt
at eɾ end of te diban, kompleteli motjonless and wit eɾ t͡ʃin ɾaised
a litt͡ɬe as if ʃe weɾe balansinɡ sometʝnɡ on it wʝt͡ʃ was kite likeli
to faʝ. if ʃe saw me out of te koɾneɾ of eɾ eies ʃe ɡabe no ʝnt of
it--indeed, i was almost suɾpɾised into muɾmuɾinɡ an apoloɡi foɾ abinɡ
distuɾbed eɾ bi kominɡ in.

te oteɾ xiɾl, daisi, made an attempt to ɾise--ʃe leaned sliɡt͡ɬi
foɾwaɾd wit a konssientjous ekspɾessjon--ten ʃe lauɡed, an absuɾd,
t͡ʃaɾminɡ litt͡ɬe lauɡ, and i lauɡed too and kame foɾwaɾd into te
ɾoom.

"i'm p-paɾalised wit appiness."

ʃe lauɡed aɡain, as if ʃe said sometʝnɡ beɾi witti, and eld mi and
foɾ a moment, lookinɡ up into mi fase, pɾomisinɡ tat teɾe was no one
in te woɾld ʃe so mut͡ʃ wanted to see. tat was a wai ʃe ad.
ʃe ʝnted in a muɾmuɾ tat te suɾname of te balansinɡ xiɾl was bakeɾ.
(i'be eaɾd it said tat daisi's muɾmuɾ was onli to make people
lean towaɾd eɾ; an irelebant kɾitisism tat made it no less t͡ʃaɾminɡ.)

at ani ɾate miss bakeɾ's lips flutteɾed, ʃe nodded at me almost
impeɾseptibli and ten kikkli tipped eɾ ead bakk aɡain--te obxekt
ʃe was balansinɡ ad obbjousli totteɾed a litt͡ɬe and xiben eɾ sometʝnɡ
of a fɾiɡt. aɡain a soɾt of apoloɡi aɾose to mi lips. almost ani
eksʝbitjon of komplete self suffisienki dɾaws a stunned tɾibute fɾom me.

i looked bakk at mi kousin wo beɡan to ask me kestjons in eɾ low,
tɾiʝinɡ boise. it was te kind of boise tat te eaɾ foʝows up and
down as if eat͡ʃ speet͡ʃ is an aranxement of notes tat wiʝ nebeɾ be
plaied aɡain. eɾ fase was sad and lobeli wit bɾiɡt tʝnɡs in it,
bɾiɡt eies and a bɾiɡt passjonate mout--but teɾe was an ekssitement
in eɾ boise tat men wo ad kaɾed foɾ eɾ found diffikult to foɾxet:
a sinxinɡ kompulsjon, a wʝspeɾed "listen," a pɾomise tat ʃe ad done
ɡai, ekssitinɡ tʝnɡs xust a wʝle sinse and tat teɾe weɾe ɡai,
ekssitinɡ tʝnɡs obeɾinɡ in te nekst ouɾ.

i told eɾ ow i ad stopped off in t͡ʃikaɡo foɾ a dai on mi wai east
and ow a dosen people ad sent teiɾ lobe tɾouɡ me.

"do tei miss me?" ʃe kɾjed ekstatikaʝi.

"te wole town is desolate. aʝ te kaɾs abe te left ɾeaɾ weel
painted blakk as a mouɾninɡ wɾeat and teɾe's a peɾsistent wail aʝ
niɡt alonɡ te noɾt ʃoɾe."

"ow ɡoɾxeous! let's ɡo bakk, tom. tomorow!" ten ʃe added
irelebant͡ɬi, "iou ouɡt to see te babi."

"i'd like to."

"ʃe's asleep. ʃe's two ieaɾs old. aben't iou ebeɾ seen eɾ?"

"nebeɾ."

"weʝ, iou ouɡt to see eɾ. ʃe's----"

tom but͡ʃanan wo ad been obeɾinɡ ɾest͡ɬessli about te ɾoom stopped
and ɾested ʝs and on mi ʃouldeɾ.

"wat iou doinɡ, nikk?"

"i'm a bond man."

"wo wit?"

i told ʝm.

"nebeɾ eaɾd of tem," e ɾemaɾked desisibeli.

tʝs annoied me.

"iou wiʝ," i answeɾed ʃoɾt͡ɬi. "iou wiʝ if iou stai in te east."

"o, i'ʝ stai in te east, don't iou wori," e said, ɡlansinɡ at
daisi and ten bakk at me, as if e weɾe aleɾt foɾ sometʝnɡ moɾe.
"i'd be a ɡod damned fool to libe aniweɾe else."

at tʝs point miss bakeɾ said "absoluteli!" wit sut͡ʃ suddenness tat i
staɾted--it was te fiɾst woɾd ʃe utteɾed sinse i kame into te ɾoom.
ebident͡ɬi it suɾpɾised eɾ as mut͡ʃ as it did me, foɾ ʃe iawned and
wit a seɾjes of ɾapid, deft mobements stood up into te ɾoom.

"i'm stiff," ʃe komplained, "i'be been liinɡ on tat sofa foɾ as lonɡ
as i kan ɾemembeɾ."

"don't look at me," daisi ɾetoɾted. "i'be been tɾiinɡ to xet iou to new
ioɾk aʝ afteɾnoon."

"no, tanks," said miss bakeɾ to te fouɾ kokktails xust in fɾom te
pantɾi, "i'm absoluteli in tɾaininɡ."

eɾ ost looked at eɾ inkɾedulousli.

"iou aɾe!" e took down ʝs dɾink as if it weɾe a dɾop in te bottom of
a ɡlass. "ow iou ebeɾ xet anitʝnɡ done is beiond me."

i looked at miss bakeɾ wondeɾinɡ wat it was ʃe "ɡot done." i enxoied
lookinɡ at eɾ. ʃe was a slendeɾ, smaʝ-bɾeasted xiɾl, wit an eɾekt
karjaxe wʝt͡ʃ ʃe aksentwated bi tɾowinɡ eɾ bodi bakkwaɾd at te
ʃouldeɾs like a iounɡ kadet. eɾ ɡɾei sun-stɾained eies looked bakk at
me wit polite ɾesipɾokal kuɾjositi out of a wan, t͡ʃaɾminɡ diskontented
fase. it okkured to me now tat i ad seen eɾ, oɾ a piktuɾe of eɾ,
someweɾe befoɾe.

"iou libe in west eɡɡ," ʃe ɾemaɾked kontemptwousli. "i know somebodi
teɾe."

"i don't know a sinɡle----"

"iou must know ɡatsbi."

"ɡatsbi?" demanded daisi. "wat ɡatsbi?"

befoɾe i kould ɾepli tat e was mi neiɡboɾ dinneɾ was announsed;
wedxinɡ ʝs tense aɾm impeɾatibeli undeɾ mine tom but͡ʃanan kompeʝed
me fɾom te ɾoom as touɡ e weɾe mobinɡ a t͡ʃekkeɾ to anoteɾ skaɾe.

slendeɾli, lanɡidli, teiɾ ands set liɡt͡ɬi on teiɾ ʝps te two
iounɡ women pɾeseded us out onto a ɾosi-koloɾed poɾt͡ʃ open towaɾd te
sunset weɾe fouɾ kandles flikkeɾed on te table in te diminiʃed
wind.

"wi kandles?" obxekted daisi, fɾowninɡ. ʃe snapped tem out wit eɾ
finxeɾs. "in two weeks it'ʝ be te lonxest dai in te ieaɾ."
ʃe looked at us aʝ ɾadjant͡ɬi. "do iou alwais watt͡ʃ foɾ te lonxest dai
of te ieaɾ and ten miss it? i alwais watt͡ʃ foɾ te lonxest dai in te
ieaɾ and ten miss it."

"we ouɡt to plan sometʝnɡ," iawned miss bakeɾ, sittinɡ down at te
table as if ʃe weɾe xettinɡ into bed.

"aʝ ɾiɡt," said daisi. "wat'ʝ we plan?" ʃe tuɾned to me elplessli.
"wat do people plan?"

befoɾe i kould answeɾ eɾ eies fastened wit an awed ekspɾessjon on eɾ
litt͡ɬe finxeɾ.

"look!" ʃe komplained. "i wɾt it."

we aʝ looked--te knukkle was blakk and blwe.

"iou did it, tom," ʃe said akkusinɡli. "i know iou didn't mean to
but iou did do it. tat's wat i xet foɾ mariinɡ a bɾute of a man,
a ɡɾeat biɡ wlkinɡ pisikal spesimen of a----"

"i ate tat woɾd wlkinɡ," obxekted tom kɾossli, "eben in kiddinɡ."

"wlkinɡ," insisted daisi.

sometimes ʃe and miss bakeɾ talked at onse, unobtɾusibeli and wit a
banteɾinɡ inkonsekense tat was nebeɾ kite t͡ʃatteɾ, tat was as kool
as teiɾ wʝte dɾesses and teiɾ impeɾsonal eies in te absense of aʝ
desiɾe. tei weɾe eɾe--and tei aksepted tom and me, makinɡ onli a
polite pleasant effoɾt to enteɾtain oɾ to be enteɾtained. tei knew
tat pɾesent͡ɬi dinneɾ would be obeɾ and a litt͡ɬe lateɾ te ebeninɡ too
would be obeɾ and kaswaʝi put awai. it was ʃaɾpli diffeɾent fɾom te
west weɾe an ebeninɡ was wrjed fɾom pase to pase towaɾd its
klose in a kontinwaʝi disappointed antisipatjon oɾ else in ʃeeɾ
neɾbous dɾead of te moment itself.

"iou make me feel unsibilised, daisi," i konfessed on mi sekond ɡlass
of koɾki but ɾateɾ impɾessibe klaɾet. "kan't iou talk about kɾops oɾ
sometʝnɡ?"

i meant notʝnɡ in paɾtikulaɾ bi tʝs ɾemaɾk but it was taken up in an
unekspekted wai.

"sibilisatjon's ɡoinɡ to pjeses," bɾoke out tom bjolent͡ɬi.
"i'be ɡotten to be a terible pessimist about tʝnɡs. abe iou ɾead
'te ɾise of te kolouɾed empiɾes' bi tʝs man ɡoddaɾd?"

"wi, no," i answeɾed, ɾateɾ suɾpɾised bi ʝs tone.

"weʝ, it's a fine book, and ebeɾibodi ouɡt to ɾead it. te idea is if
we don't look out te wʝte ɾase wiʝ be--wiʝ be utteɾli submeɾxed.
it's aʝ ssientifik stuff; it's been pɾobed."

"tom's xettinɡ beɾi pɾofound," said daisi wit an ekspɾessjon of
untouɡtful sadness. "e ɾeads deep books wit lonɡ woɾds in tem.
wat was tat woɾd we----"

"weʝ, tese books aɾe aʝ ssientifik," insisted tom, ɡlansinɡ at eɾ
impatjent͡ɬi. "tʝs feʝow as woɾked out te wole tʝnɡ. it's up to us
wo aɾe te dominant ɾase to watt͡ʃ out oɾ tese oteɾ ɾases wiʝ abe
kontɾol of tʝnɡs."

"we'be ɡot to beat tem down," wʝspeɾed daisi, winkinɡ feɾosiousli
towaɾd te feɾbent sun.

"iou ouɡt to libe in kalifoɾnja--" beɡan miss bakeɾ but tom
interupted eɾ bi ʃiftinɡ eabili in ʝs t͡ʃaiɾ.

"tʝs idea is tat we'ɾe noɾdiks. i am, and iou aɾe and iou aɾe
and----" afteɾ an infinitesimal esitatjon e inkluded daisi wit a
sliɡt nod and ʃe winked at me aɡain. "--and we'be pɾodused aʝ te
tʝnɡs tat ɡo to make sibilisatjon--o, ssiense and aɾt and aʝ tat.
do iou see?"

teɾe was sometʝnɡ patetik in ʝs konsentɾatjon as if ʝs komplasenki,
moɾe akute tan of old, was not enouɡ to ʝm ani moɾe. wen, almost
immedjateli, te telepone ɾanɡ inside and te but͡ɬeɾ left te poɾt͡ʃ daisi
seised upon te momentaɾi interuptjon and leaned towaɾd me.

"i'ʝ teʝ iou a famili sekɾet," ʃe wʝspeɾed entwsjastikaʝi. "it's
about te but͡ɬeɾ's nose. do iou want to eaɾ about te but͡ɬeɾ's nose?"

"tat's wi i kame obeɾ toniɡt."

"weʝ, e wasn't alwais a but͡ɬeɾ; e used to be te silbeɾ poliʃeɾ foɾ
some people in new ioɾk tat ad a silbeɾ seɾbise foɾ two wndɾed people.
e ad to poliʃ it fɾom moɾninɡ tiʝ niɡt until finaʝi it beɡan to
affekt ʝs nose----"

"tʝnɡs went fɾom bad to woɾse," suɡxested miss bakeɾ.

"ies. tʝnɡs went fɾom bad to woɾse until finaʝi e ad to xibe up
ʝs positjon."

foɾ a moment te last sunʃine feʝ wit ɾomantik affektjon upon
eɾ ɡlowinɡ fase; eɾ boise kompeʝed me foɾwaɾd bɾeatlessli as
i listened--ten te ɡlow faded, eat͡ʃ liɡt deseɾtinɡ eɾ wit
linxeɾinɡ ɾeɡɾet like t͡ʃildɾen leabinɡ a pleasant stɾeet at dusk.

te but͡ɬeɾ kame bakk and muɾmuɾed sometʝnɡ klose to tom's eaɾ
weɾeupon tom fɾowned, puʃed bakk ʝs t͡ʃaiɾ and witout a woɾd went
inside. as if ʝs absense kikkened sometʝnɡ witʝn eɾ daisi leaned
foɾwaɾd aɡain, eɾ boise ɡlowinɡ and sinxinɡ.

"i lobe to see iou at mi table, nikk. iou ɾemind me of a--of a ɾose, an
absolute ɾose. doesn't e?" ʃe tuɾned to miss bakeɾ foɾ konfiɾmatjon.
"an absolute ɾose?"

tʝs was untɾwe. i am not eben faint͡ɬi like a ɾose. ʃe was onli
ekstempoɾisinɡ but a stirinɡ waɾmt flowed fɾom eɾ as if eɾ
eaɾt was tɾiinɡ to kome out to iou konsealed in one of tose
bɾeatless, tɾiʝinɡ woɾds. ten suddenli ʃe tɾew eɾ napkin on te
table and ekskused eɾself and went into te ouse.

miss bakeɾ and i ekst͡ʃanxed a ʃoɾt ɡlanse konssiousli deboid of
meaninɡ. i was about to speak wen ʃe sat up aleɾt͡ɬi and said "ʃ!" in
a waɾninɡ boise. a subdwed impassjoned muɾmuɾ was audible in te ɾoom
beiond and miss bakeɾ leaned foɾwaɾd, unaʃamed, tɾiinɡ to eaɾ. te
muɾmuɾ tɾembled on te beɾxe of koeɾense, sank down, mounted
ekssitedli, and ten seased altoxeteɾ.

"tʝs mɾ. ɡatsbi iou spoke of is mi neiɡboɾ----" i said.

"don't talk. i want to eaɾ wat appens."

"is sometʝnɡ appeninɡ?" i inkiɾed innosent͡ɬi.

"iou mean to sai iou don't know?" said miss bakeɾ, onest͡ɬi suɾpɾised.
"i touɡt ebeɾibodi knew."

"i don't."

"wi----" ʃe said esitant͡ɬi, "tom's ɡot some woman in new ioɾk."

"ɡot some woman?" i ɾepeated blankli.

miss bakeɾ nodded.

"ʃe miɡt abe te desenki not to telepone ʝm at dinneɾ-time. don't
iou tʝnk?"

almost befoɾe i ad ɡɾasped eɾ meaninɡ teɾe was te flutteɾ of
a dɾess and te kɾunt͡ʃ of leateɾ boots and tom and daisi weɾe bakk
at te table.

"it kouldn't be elped!" kɾjed daisi wit tense ɡaieti.

ʃe sat down, ɡlansed seaɾt͡ʃinɡli at miss bakeɾ and ten at me and
kontinwed: "i looked outdooɾs foɾ a minute and it's beɾi ɾomantik
outdooɾs. teɾe's a biɾd on te lawn tat i tʝnk must be a niɡtinɡale
kome obeɾ on te kunaɾd oɾ wʝte staɾ line. e's sinxinɡ awai----" eɾ
boise sanɡ "----it's ɾomantik, isn't it, tom?"

"beɾi ɾomantik," e said, and ten miseɾabli to me: "if it's liɡt enouɡ
afteɾ dinneɾ i want to take iou down to te stables."

te telepone ɾanɡ inside, staɾt͡ɬinɡli, and as daisi ʃook eɾ
ead desisibeli at tom te subxekt of te stables, in fakt aʝ
subxekts, baniʃed into aiɾ. amonɡ te bɾoken fɾaɡments of te
last fibe minutes at table i ɾemembeɾ te kandles beinɡ lit aɡain,
point͡ɬessli, and i was konssious of wantinɡ to look skaɾeli at ebeɾi
one and iet to aboid aʝ eies. i kouldn't ɡess wat daisi and tom
weɾe tʝnkinɡ but i doubt if eben miss bakeɾ wo seemed to abe
masteɾed a seɾtain aɾdi skeptisism was able utteɾli to put tʝs fift
ɡest's ʃɾiʝ metaʝik uɾxenki out of mind. to a seɾtain tempeɾament
te sitwatjon miɡt abe seemed intɾiɡinɡ--mi own instinkt was to
telepone immedjateli foɾ te polise.

te oɾses, needless to sai, weɾe not mentjoned aɡain. tom and miss
bakeɾ, wit sebeɾal feet of twiliɡt between tem stɾoʝed bakk into
te libɾaɾi, as if to a bixil beside a peɾfekt͡ɬi tanxible bodi, wʝle
tɾiinɡ to look pleasant͡ɬi inteɾested and a litt͡ɬe deaf i foʝowed
daisi aɾound a t͡ʃain of konnektinɡ beɾandas to te poɾt͡ʃ in fɾont. in
its deep ɡloom we sat down side bi side on a wikkeɾ settee.

daisi took eɾ fase in eɾ ands, as if feelinɡ its lobeli ʃape, and
eɾ eies mobed ɡɾadwaʝi out into te belbet dusk. i saw tat tuɾbulent
emotjons possessed eɾ, so i asked wat i touɡt would be some
sedatibe kestjons about eɾ litt͡ɬe xiɾl.

"we don't know eat͡ʃ oteɾ beɾi weʝ, nikk," ʃe said suddenli.
"eben if we aɾe kousins. iou didn't kome to mi weddinɡ."

"i wasn't bakk fɾom te waɾ."

"tat's tɾwe." ʃe esitated. "weʝ, i'be ad a beɾi bad time, nikk,
and i'm pɾetti kinikal about ebeɾitʝnɡ."

ebident͡ɬi ʃe ad ɾeason to be. i waited but ʃe didn't sai ani moɾe,
and afteɾ a moment i ɾetuɾned ɾateɾ feebli to te subxekt of eɾ
dauɡteɾ.

"i suppose ʃe talks, and--eats, and ebeɾitʝnɡ."

"o, ies." ʃe looked at me absent͡ɬi. "listen, nikk; let me teʝ iou wat
i said wen ʃe was boɾn. would iou like to eaɾ?"

"beɾi mut͡ʃ."

"it'ʝ ʃow iou ow i'be ɡotten to feel about--tʝnɡs. weʝ, ʃe was less
tan an ouɾ old and tom was ɡod knows weɾe. i woke up out of te eteɾ
wit an utteɾli abandoned feelinɡ and asked te nuɾse ɾiɡt awai if it
was a boi oɾ a xiɾl. ʃe told me it was a xiɾl, and so i tuɾned mi ead
awai and wept. 'aʝ ɾiɡt,' i said, 'i'm ɡlad it's a xiɾl. and i ope
ʃe'ʝ be a fool--tat's te best tʝnɡ a xiɾl kan be in tʝs woɾld,
a beautiful litt͡ɬe fool."

"iou see i tʝnk ebeɾitʝnɡ's terible aniow," ʃe went on in a
konbinsed wai. "ebeɾibodi tʝnks so--te most adbansed people. and i know.
i'be been ebeɾiweɾe and seen ebeɾitʝnɡ and done ebeɾitʝnɡ."
eɾ eies flaʃed aɾound eɾ in a defjant wai, ɾateɾ like tom's, and ʃe
lauɡed wit tɾiʝinɡ skoɾn. "sopʝstikated--ɡod, i'm sopʝstikated!"

te instant eɾ boise bɾoke off, seasinɡ to kompel mi attentjon,
mi beljef, i felt te basik insinseɾiti of wat ʃe ad said.
it made me uneasi, as touɡ te wole ebeninɡ ad been a tɾikk
of some soɾt to eksakt a kontɾibutoɾi emotjon fɾom me. i waited,
and suɾe enouɡ, in a moment ʃe looked at me wit an absolute smiɾk
on eɾ lobeli fase as if ʃe ad asseɾted eɾ membeɾʃip in a ɾateɾ
distinɡiʃed sekɾet sosieti to wʝt͡ʃ ʃe and tom belonxed.


inside, te kɾimson ɾoom bloomed wit liɡt. tom and miss bakeɾ
sat at eiteɾ end of te lonɡ kout͡ʃ and ʃe ɾead aloud to ʝm fɾom
te "satuɾdai ebeninɡ post"--te woɾds, muɾmuɾous and
uninflekted, ɾunninɡ toxeteɾ in a sootʝnɡ tune. te lamp-liɡt,
bɾiɡt on ʝs boots and duʝ on te autumn-leaf ieʝow of eɾ aiɾ,
ɡlinted alonɡ te papeɾ as ʃe tuɾned a paxe wit a flutteɾ of slendeɾ
muskles in eɾ aɾms.

wen we kame in ʃe eld us silent foɾ a moment wit a lifted and.

"to be kontinwed," ʃe said, tossinɡ te maɡasine on te table, "in ouɾ
beɾi nekst isswe."

eɾ bodi asseɾted itself wit a ɾest͡ɬess mobement of eɾ knee, and ʃe
stood up.

"ten o'klokk," ʃe ɾemaɾked, appaɾent͡ɬi findinɡ te time on te
seilinɡ. "time foɾ tʝs ɡood xiɾl to ɡo to bed."

"xoɾdan's ɡoinɡ to plai in te touɾnament tomorow," eksplained daisi,
"obeɾ at westt͡ʃesteɾ."

"o,--iou'ɾe xoɾdan bakeɾ."

i knew now wi eɾ fase was familjaɾ--its pleasinɡ kontemptwous
ekspɾessjon ad looked out at me fɾom mani ɾotoɡɾabuɾe piktuɾes of
te spoɾtinɡ life at aʃebiʝe and ot spɾinɡs and palm beat͡ʃ. i
ad eaɾd some stoɾi of eɾ too, a kɾitikal, unpleasant stoɾi,
but wat it was i ad foɾɡotten lonɡ aɡo.

"ɡood niɡt," ʃe said soft͡ɬi. "wake me at eiɡt, won't iou."

"if iou'ʝ xet up."

"i wiʝ. ɡood niɡt, mɾ. karawai. see iou anon."

"of kouɾse iou wiʝ," konfiɾmed daisi. "in fakt i tʝnk i'ʝ aranxe
a marjaxe. kome obeɾ often, nikk, and i'ʝ soɾt of--o--flinɡ iou
toxeteɾ. iou know--lokk iou up aksidentaʝi in linen klosets and puʃ
iou out to sea in a boat, and aʝ tat soɾt of tʝnɡ----"

"ɡood niɡt," kaʝed miss bakeɾ fɾom te staiɾs. "i aben't eaɾd a woɾd."

"ʃe's a nise xiɾl," said tom afteɾ a moment. "tei ouɡtn't to let eɾ
ɾun aɾound te kountɾi tʝs wai."

"wo ouɡtn't to?" inkiɾed daisi koldli.

"eɾ famili."

"eɾ famili is one aunt about a tousand ieaɾs old. besides, nikk's
ɡoinɡ to look afteɾ eɾ, aɾen't iou, nikk? ʃe's ɡoinɡ to spend lots of
week-ends out eɾe tʝs summeɾ. i tʝnk te ome inflwense wiʝ be beɾi
ɡood foɾ eɾ."

daisi and tom looked at eat͡ʃ oteɾ foɾ a moment in silense.

"is ʃe fɾom new ioɾk?" i asked kikkli.

"fɾom lowisbiʝe. ouɾ wʝte xiɾlood was passed toxeteɾ teɾe. ouɾ
beautiful wʝte----"

"did iou xibe nikk a litt͡ɬe eaɾt to eaɾt talk on te beɾanda?"
demanded tom suddenli.

"did i?" ʃe looked at me. "i kan't seem to ɾemembeɾ, but i tʝnk
we talked about te noɾdik ɾase. ies, i'm suɾe we did. it soɾt of
kɾept up on us and fiɾst tʝnɡ iou know----"

"don't beljebe ebeɾitʝnɡ iou eaɾ, nikk," e adbised me.

i said liɡt͡ɬi tat i ad eaɾd notʝnɡ at aʝ, and a few minutes lateɾ
i ɡot up to ɡo ome. tei kame to te dooɾ wit me and stood side bi
side in a t͡ʃeeɾful skaɾe of liɡt. as i staɾted mi motoɾ daisi
peɾemptoɾili kaʝed "wait!

"i foɾɡot to ask iou sometʝnɡ, and it's impoɾtant. we eaɾd iou weɾe
enɡaxed to a xiɾl out west."

"tat's ɾiɡt," koroboɾated tom kindli. "we eaɾd tat iou weɾe
enɡaxed."

"it's libel. i'm too pooɾ."

"but we eaɾd it," insisted daisi, suɾpɾisinɡ me bi openinɡ up aɡain in
a floweɾ-like wai. "we eaɾd it fɾom tɾee people so it must be tɾwe."

of kouɾse i knew wat tei weɾe ɾeferinɡ to, but i wasn't eben baɡeli
enɡaxed. te fakt tat ɡossip ad publiʃed te banns was one of te
ɾeasons i ad kome east. iou kan't stop ɡoinɡ wit an old fɾjend on
akkount of ɾumoɾs and on te oteɾ and i ad no intentjon of beinɡ
ɾumoɾed into marjaxe.

teiɾ inteɾest ɾateɾ tout͡ʃed me and made tem less ɾemoteli
ɾit͡ʃ--nebeɾteless, i was konfused and a litt͡ɬe disɡwsted as i dɾobe
awai. it seemed to me tat te tʝnɡ foɾ daisi to do was to ɾuʃ out of
te ouse, t͡ʃild in aɾms--but appaɾent͡ɬi teɾe weɾe no sut͡ʃ intentjons
in eɾ ead. as foɾ tom, te fakt tat e "ad some woman in new ioɾk"
was ɾeaʝi less suɾpɾisinɡ tan tat e ad been depɾessed bi a book.
sometʝnɡ was makinɡ ʝm nibble at te edxe of stale ideas as if ʝs
stuɾdi pisikal eɡotism no lonxeɾ nouɾiʃed ʝs peɾemptoɾi eaɾt.

alɾeadi it was deep summeɾ on ɾoadouse ɾoofs and in fɾont of waiside
ɡaɾaxes, weɾe new ɾed ɡas-pumps sat out in pools of liɡt, and wen i
ɾeat͡ʃed mi estate at west eɡɡ i ɾan te kaɾ undeɾ its ʃed and sat foɾ
a wʝle on an abandoned ɡɾass ɾoʝeɾ in te iaɾd. te wind ad blown
off, leabinɡ a loud bɾiɡt niɡt wit winɡs beatinɡ in te tɾees and
a peɾsistent oɾɡan sound as te fuʝ beʝows of te eaɾt blew te
fɾoɡs fuʝ of life. te silowette of a mobinɡ kat wabeɾed akɾoss te
moonliɡt and tuɾninɡ mi ead to watt͡ʃ it i saw tat i was not
alone--fifti feet awai a fiɡwɾe ad emeɾxed fɾom te ʃadow of mi
neiɡboɾ's mansjon and was standinɡ wit ʝs ands in ʝs pokkets
ɾeɡaɾdinɡ te silbeɾ peppeɾ of te staɾs. sometʝnɡ in ʝs leisuɾeli
mobements and te sekuɾe positjon of ʝs feet upon te lawn suɡxested
tat it was mɾ. ɡatsbi ʝmself, kome out to deteɾmine wat ʃaɾe was
ʝs of ouɾ lokal eabens.

i desided to kaʝ to ʝm. miss bakeɾ ad mentjoned ʝm at dinneɾ, and
tat would do foɾ an intɾoduktjon. but i didn't kaʝ to ʝm foɾ e ɡabe
a sudden intimatjon tat e was kontent to be alone--e stɾett͡ʃed out ʝs
aɾms towaɾd te daɾk wateɾ in a kuɾjous wai, and faɾ as i was fɾom ʝm
i kould abe swoɾn e was tɾemblinɡ. inboluntaɾili i ɡlansed seawaɾd--and
distinɡiʃed notʝnɡ ekssept a sinɡle ɡɾeen liɡt, minute and faɾ awai,
tat miɡt abe been te end of a dokk. wen i looked onse moɾe foɾ ɡatsbi
e ad baniʃed, and i was alone aɡain in te unkjet daɾkness.




t͡ʃapteɾ 2



about alf wai between west eɡɡ and new ioɾk te motoɾ-ɾoad astili
xoins te ɾailɾoad and ɾuns beside it foɾ a kaɾteɾ of a mile, so as to
ʃɾink awai fɾom a seɾtain desolate aɾea of land. tʝs is a baʝei of
aʃes--a fantastik faɾm weɾe aʃes ɡɾow like weat into ɾidxes and
ʝʝs and ɡɾoteske ɡaɾdens weɾe aʃes take te foɾms of ouses and
t͡ʃimneis and ɾisinɡ smoke and finaʝi, wit a tɾanssendent effoɾt, of
men wo mobe dimli and alɾeadi kɾumblinɡ tɾouɡ te powdeɾi aiɾ.
okkasjonaʝi a line of ɡɾei kaɾs kɾawls alonɡ an inbisible tɾakk, xibes
out a ɡast͡ɬi kɾeak and komes to ɾest, and immedjateli te aʃ-ɡɾei
men swaɾm up wit leaden spades and stiɾ up an impenetɾable kloud
wʝt͡ʃ skɾeens teiɾ obskuɾe opeɾatjons fɾom iouɾ siɡt.

but abobe te ɡɾei land and te spasms of bleak dust wʝt͡ʃ dɾift
endlessli obeɾ it, iou peɾseibe, afteɾ a moment, te eies of doktoɾ t.
x. ekklebuɾɡ. te eies of doktoɾ t. x. ekklebuɾɡ aɾe blwe and
xiɡantik--teiɾ ɾetinas aɾe one iaɾd ʝɡ. tei look out of no fase but,
instead, fɾom a paiɾ of enoɾmous ieʝow spektakles wʝt͡ʃ pass obeɾ a
noneksistent nose. ebident͡ɬi some wild waɡ of an okulist set tem teɾe to
fatten ʝs pɾaktise in te boɾouɡ of keens, and ten sank down ʝmself
into eteɾnal blindness oɾ foɾɡot tem and mobed awai. but ʝs eies,
dimmed a litt͡ɬe bi mani paint͡ɬess dais undeɾ sun and ɾain, bɾood on obeɾ
te solemn dumpinɡ ɡɾound.

te baʝei of aʃes is bounded on one side bi a smaʝ foul ɾibeɾ, and
wen te dɾawbɾidxe is up to let baɾxes tɾouɡ, te passenxeɾs on
waitinɡ tɾains kan staɾe at te dismal ssene foɾ as lonɡ as alf an
ouɾ. teɾe is alwais a alt teɾe of at least a minute and it was
bekause of tʝs tat i fiɾst met tom but͡ʃanan's mistɾess.

te fakt tat e ad one was insisted upon weɾebeɾ e was known. ʝs
akkaintanses ɾesented te fakt tat e tuɾned up in populaɾ
ɾestauɾants wit eɾ and, leabinɡ eɾ at a table, saunteɾed about,
t͡ʃattinɡ wit womsoebeɾ e knew. touɡ i was kuɾjous to see eɾ i
ad no desiɾe to meet eɾ--but i did. i went up to new ioɾk wit tom on
te tɾain one afteɾnoon and wen we stopped bi te aʃeaps e xumped
to ʝs feet and takinɡ old of mi elbow liteɾaʝi foɾsed me fɾom te
kaɾ.

"we'ɾe xettinɡ off!" e insisted. "i want iou to meet mi xiɾl."

i tʝnk e'd tanked up a ɡood deal at lunt͡ʃeon and ʝs deteɾminatjon to
abe mi kompani boɾdeɾed on bjolense. te supeɾsiljous assumptjon was tat
on sundai afteɾnoon i ad notʝnɡ betteɾ to do.

i foʝowed ʝm obeɾ a low wʝte-waʃed ɾailɾoad fense and we walked
bakk a wndɾed iaɾds alonɡ te ɾoad undeɾ doktoɾ ekklebuɾɡ's peɾsistent
staɾe. te onli bwildinɡ in siɡt was a smaʝ blokk of ieʝow bɾikk
sittinɡ on te edxe of te waste land, a soɾt of kompakt main stɾeet
ministeɾinɡ to it and kontiɡwous to absoluteli notʝnɡ. one of te
tɾee ʃops it kontained was foɾ ɾent and anoteɾ was an aʝ-niɡt
ɾestauɾant appɾoat͡ʃed bi a tɾail of aʃes; te tʝɾd was a
ɡaɾaxe--ɾepaiɾs. xeoɾxe b. wilson. kaɾs bouɡt and sold--and i foʝowed
tom inside.

te inteɾjoɾ was unpɾospeɾous and baɾe; te onli kaɾ bisible was te
dust-kobeɾed wɾekk of a foɾd wʝt͡ʃ kɾout͡ʃed in a dim koɾneɾ. it ad
okkured to me tat tʝs ʃadow of a ɡaɾaxe must be a blind and tat
sumptwous and ɾomantik apaɾtments weɾe konsealed obeɾead wen te
pɾopɾjetoɾ ʝmself appeaɾed in te dooɾ of an offise, wipinɡ ʝs ands
on a pjese of waste. e was a blonde, spiɾit͡ɬess man, anaemik, and
faint͡ɬi andsome. wen e saw us a damp ɡleam of ope spɾanɡ into ʝs
liɡt blwe eies.

"eʝo, wilson, old man," said tom, slappinɡ ʝm xobjaʝi on te
ʃouldeɾ. "ow's business?"

"i kan't komplain," answeɾed wilson unkonbinsinɡli. "wen aɾe iou ɡoinɡ
to seʝ me tat kaɾ?"

"nekst week; i'be ɡot mi man woɾkinɡ on it now."

"woɾks pɾetti slow, don't e?"

"no, e doesn't," said tom koldli. "and if iou feel tat wai about it,
maibe i'd betteɾ seʝ it someweɾe else afteɾ aʝ."

"i don't mean tat," eksplained wilson kikkli. "i xust meant----"

ʝs boise faded off and tom ɡlansed impatjent͡ɬi aɾound te ɡaɾaxe. ten
i eaɾd footsteps on a staiɾs and in a moment te tʝkkiʃ fiɡwɾe of a
woman blokked out te liɡt fɾom te offise dooɾ. ʃe was in te middle
tʝɾtjes, and faint͡ɬi stout, but ʃe karjed eɾ suɾplus fleʃ senswousli
as some women kan. eɾ fase, abobe a spotted dɾess of daɾk blwe
kɾepe-de-t͡ʃine, kontained no faset oɾ ɡleam of beauti but teɾe was an
immedjateli peɾseptible bitaliti about eɾ as if te neɾbes of eɾ bodi
weɾe kontinwaʝi smouldeɾinɡ. ʃe smiled slowli and walkinɡ tɾouɡ eɾ
wsband as if e weɾe a ɡost ʃook ands wit tom, lookinɡ ʝm fluʃ in
te eie. ten ʃe wet eɾ lips and witout tuɾninɡ aɾound spoke to eɾ
wsband in a soft, koaɾse boise:

"xet some t͡ʃaiɾs, wi don't iou, so somebodi kan sit down."

"o, suɾe," aɡɾeed wilson wrjedli and went towaɾd te litt͡ɬe offise,
minɡlinɡ immedjateli wit te sement koloɾ of te waʝs. a wʝte aʃen
dust beiled ʝs daɾk swit and ʝs pale aiɾ as it beiled ebeɾitʝnɡ in
te bisiniti--ekssept ʝs wife, wo mobed klose to tom.

"i want to see iou," said tom intent͡ɬi. "xet on te nekst tɾain."

"aʝ ɾiɡt."

"i'ʝ meet iou bi te news-stand on te loweɾ lebel."

ʃe nodded and mobed awai fɾom ʝm xust as xeoɾxe wilson
emeɾxed wit two t͡ʃaiɾs fɾom ʝs offise dooɾ.

we waited foɾ eɾ down te ɾoad and out of siɡt. it was a few dais befoɾe
te fouɾt of xuli, and a ɡɾei, skɾawni italjan t͡ʃild was settinɡ
toɾpedoes in a ɾow alonɡ te ɾailɾoad tɾakk.

"terible plase, isn't it," said tom, ekst͡ʃanxinɡ a fɾown wit doktoɾ
ekklebuɾɡ.

"awful."

"it does eɾ ɡood to xet awai."

"doesn't eɾ wsband obxekt?"

"wilson? e tʝnks ʃe ɡoes to see eɾ sisteɾ in new ioɾk. e's so dumb
e doesn't know e's alibe."

so tom but͡ʃanan and ʝs xiɾl and i went up toxeteɾ to new ioɾk--oɾ not
kite toxeteɾ, foɾ mɾs. wilson sat diskɾeet͡ɬi in anoteɾ kaɾ. tom
defered tat mut͡ʃ to te sensibilitjes of tose east eɡxeɾs wo miɡt be
on te tɾain.

ʃe ad t͡ʃanxed eɾ dɾess to a bɾown fiɡwɾed muslin wʝt͡ʃ stɾett͡ʃed
tiɡt obeɾ eɾ ɾateɾ wide ʝps as tom elped eɾ to te platfoɾm in
new ioɾk. at te news-stand ʃe bouɡt a kopi of "town tatt͡ɬe" and a
mobinɡ-piktuɾe maɡasine and, in te statjon dɾuɡ stoɾe, some kold kɾeam
and a smaʝ flask of peɾfume. upstaiɾs, in te solemn et͡ʃoinɡ dɾibe
ʃe let fouɾ taksi kabs dɾibe awai befoɾe ʃe selekted a new one,
labendeɾ-koloɾed wit ɡɾei upolsteɾi, and in tʝs we slid out fɾom te
mass of te statjon into te ɡlowinɡ sunʃine. but immedjateli ʃe
tuɾned ʃaɾpli fɾom te window and leaninɡ foɾwaɾd tapped on te
fɾont ɡlass.

"i want to xet one of tose doɡs," ʃe said eaɾnest͡ɬi. "i want to xet one
foɾ te apaɾtment. tei'ɾe nise to abe--a doɡ."

we bakked up to a ɡɾei old man wo boɾe an absuɾd ɾesemblanse to xon
d. ɾokkefeʝeɾ. in a basket, swunɡ fɾom ʝs nekk, koweɾed a dosen beɾi
ɾesent puppjes of an indeteɾminate bɾeed.

"wat kind aɾe tei?" asked mɾs. wilson eaxeɾli as e kame to te
taksi-window.

"aʝ kinds. wat kind do iou want, ladi?"

"i'd like to xet one of tose polise doɡs; i don't suppose iou ɡot tat
kind?"

te man peeɾed doubtfuʝi into te basket, plunxed in ʝs and and dɾew
one up, wɾiɡɡlinɡ, bi te bakk of te nekk.

"tat's no polise doɡ," said tom.

"no, it's not eksakt͡ɬi a polise doɡ," said te man wit disappointment
in ʝs boise. "it's moɾe of an aiɾedale." e passed ʝs and obeɾ te
bɾown waʃ-ɾaɡ of a bakk. "look at tat koat. some koat. tat's a doɡ
tat'ʝ nebeɾ boteɾ iou wit katt͡ʃinɡ kold."

"i tʝnk it's kute," said mɾs. wilson entwsjastikaʝi. "ow mut͡ʃ is it?"

"tat doɡ?" e looked at it admiɾinɡli. "tat doɡ wiʝ kost iou ten
doʝaɾs."

te aiɾedale--undoubtedli teɾe was an aiɾedale konseɾned in it someweɾe
touɡ its feet weɾe staɾt͡ɬinɡli wʝte--t͡ʃanxed ands and sett͡ɬed down
into mɾs. wilson's lap, weɾe ʃe fondled te weateɾ-pɾoof koat wit
ɾaptuɾe.

"is it a boi oɾ a xiɾl?" ʃe asked delikateli.

"tat doɡ? tat doɡ's a boi."

"it's a bitt͡ʃ," said tom desisibeli. "eɾe's iouɾ monei. ɡo and bui ten
moɾe doɡs wit it."

we dɾobe obeɾ to fift abenwe, so waɾm and soft, almost pastoɾal, on te
summeɾ sundai afteɾnoon tat i wouldn't abe been suɾpɾised to see a ɡɾeat
flokk of wʝte ʃeep tuɾn te koɾneɾ.

"old on," i said, "i abe to leabe iou eɾe."

"no, iou don't," inteɾposed tom kikkli. "miɾt͡ɬe'ʝ be wɾt if iou don't 
kome up to te apaɾtment. won't iou,
miɾt͡ɬe?"

"kome on," ʃe uɾxed. "i'ʝ telepone mi sisteɾ kateɾine. ʃe's said to
be beɾi beautiful bi people wo ouɡt to know."

"weʝ, i'd like to, but----"

we went on, kuttinɡ bakk aɡain obeɾ te paɾk towaɾd te west wndɾeds.
at 158t stɾeet te kab stopped at one slise in a lonɡ wʝte kake of
apaɾtment ouses. tɾowinɡ a ɾeɡal omekominɡ ɡlanse aɾound te
neiɡboɾood, mɾs. wilson ɡateɾed up eɾ doɡ and eɾ oteɾ puɾt͡ʃases
and went auɡtili in.

"i'm ɡoinɡ to abe te mkkees kome up," ʃe announsed as we ɾose in te
elebatoɾ. "and of kouɾse i ɡot to kaʝ up mi sisteɾ, too."

te apaɾtment was on te top flooɾ--a smaʝ libinɡ ɾoom, a smaʝ
dininɡ ɾoom, a smaʝ bedɾoom and a bat. te libinɡ ɾoom was kɾowded to
te dooɾs wit a set of tapestɾjed fuɾnituɾe entiɾeli too laɾxe foɾ it
so tat to mobe about was to stumble kontinwaʝi obeɾ ssenes of
ladjes swinxinɡ in te ɡaɾdens of beɾsaiʝes. te onli piktuɾe was
an obeɾ-enlaɾxed potoɡɾap, appaɾent͡ɬi a en sittinɡ on a blured
ɾokk. looked at fɾom a distanse owebeɾ te en ɾesolbed itself
into a bonnet and te kountenanse of a stout old ladi beamed down
into te ɾoom. sebeɾal old kopjes of "town tatt͡ɬe "lai on te table
toxeteɾ wit a kopi of "simon kaʝed peteɾ" and some of te smaʝ
skandal maɡasines of bɾoadwai. mɾs. wilson was fiɾst konseɾned wit
te doɡ. a ɾeluktant elebatoɾ boi went foɾ a boks fuʝ of stɾaw and
some milk to wʝt͡ʃ e added on ʝs own initjatibe a tin of laɾxe
aɾd doɡ biskwits--one of wʝt͡ʃ dekomposed apatetikaʝi in te sauseɾ
of milk aʝ afteɾnoon. meanwʝle tom bɾouɡt out a bott͡ɬe of wʝskei
fɾom a lokked buɾeau dooɾ.

i abe been dɾunk xust twise in mi life and te sekond time was tat
afteɾnoon so ebeɾitʝnɡ tat appened as a dim asi kast obeɾ it
altouɡ until afteɾ eiɡt o'klokk te apaɾtment was fuʝ of t͡ʃeeɾful
sun. sittinɡ on tom's lap mɾs. wilson kaʝed up sebeɾal people on te
telepone; ten teɾe weɾe no siɡaɾettes and i went out to bui some at
te dɾuɡ stoɾe on te koɾneɾ. wen i kame bakk tei ad disappeaɾed so
i sat down diskɾeet͡ɬi in te libinɡ ɾoom and ɾead a t͡ʃapteɾ of "simon
kaʝed peteɾ"--eiteɾ it was terible stuff oɾ te wʝskei distoɾted
tʝnɡs bekause it didn't make ani sense to me.

xust as tom and miɾt͡ɬe--afteɾ te fiɾst dɾink mɾs. wilson and i kaʝed
eat͡ʃ oteɾ bi ouɾ fiɾst names--ɾeappeaɾed, kompani kommensed to aribe
at te apaɾtment dooɾ.

te sisteɾ, kateɾine, was a slendeɾ, woɾldli xiɾl of about tʝɾti
wit a solid stikki bob of ɾed aiɾ and a kompleksjon powdeɾed milki
wʝte. eɾ eiebɾows ad been plukked and ten dɾawn on aɡain at a moɾe
ɾakiʃ anɡle but te effoɾts of natuɾe towaɾd te ɾestoɾatjon of te
old aliɡnment ɡabe a blured aiɾ to eɾ fase. wen ʃe mobed about
teɾe was an insessant klikkinɡ as innumeɾable potteɾi bɾaselets
xinɡled up and down upon eɾ aɾms. ʃe kame in wit sut͡ʃ a pɾopɾjetaɾi
aste and looked aɾound so possessibeli at te fuɾnituɾe tat i wondeɾed
if ʃe libed eɾe. but wen i asked eɾ ʃe lauɡed immodeɾateli, ɾepeated
mi kestjon aloud and told me ʃe libed wit a xiɾl fɾjend at a otel.

mɾ. mkkee was a pale feminine man fɾom te flat below. e ad xust
ʃabed foɾ teɾe was a wʝte spot of lateɾ on ʝs t͡ʃeekbone and e
was most ɾespektful in ʝs ɡɾeetinɡ to ebeɾione in te ɾoom. e
infoɾmed me tat e was in te "aɾtistik ɡame" and i ɡateɾed lateɾ
tat e was a potoɡɾapeɾ and ad made te dim enlaɾxement of mɾs.
wilson's moteɾ wʝt͡ʃ obeɾed like an ektoplasm on te waʝ. ʝs wife
was ʃɾiʝ, lanɡid, andsome and orible. ʃe told me wit pɾide
tat eɾ wsband ad potoɡɾaped eɾ a wndɾed and twenti-seben times
sinse tei ad been marjed.

mɾs. wilson ad t͡ʃanxed eɾ kostume some time befoɾe and was now
attiɾed in an elaboɾate afteɾnoon dɾess of kɾeam koloɾed t͡ʃiffon, wʝt͡ʃ
ɡabe out a kontinwal ɾust͡ɬe as ʃe swept about te ɾoom.
wit te inflwense of te dɾess eɾ peɾsonaliti ad also undeɾɡone a
t͡ʃanxe. te intense bitaliti tat ad been so ɾemaɾkable in te ɡaɾaxe
was konbeɾted into impɾessibe auteuɾ. eɾ lauɡteɾ, eɾ xestuɾes, eɾ
asseɾtjons bekame moɾe bjolent͡ɬi affekted moment bi moment and as ʃe
ekspanded te ɾoom ɡɾew smaʝeɾ aɾound eɾ until ʃe seemed to be
ɾebolbinɡ on a noisi, kɾeakinɡ pibot tɾouɡ te smoki aiɾ.

"mi deaɾ," ʃe told eɾ sisteɾ in a ʝɡ minsinɡ ʃout, "most of tese
feʝas wiʝ t͡ʃeat iou ebeɾi time. aʝ tei tʝnk of is monei. i ad a
woman up eɾe last week to look at mi feet and wen ʃe ɡabe me te
biʝ iou'd of touɡt ʃe ad mi appendisitus out."

"wat was te name of te woman?" asked mɾs. mkkee.

"mɾs. ebeɾaɾdt. ʃe ɡoes aɾound lookinɡ at people's feet in teiɾ own
omes."

"i like iouɾ dɾess," ɾemaɾked mɾs. mkkee, "i tʝnk it's adoɾable."

mɾs. wilson ɾexekted te kompliment bi ɾaisinɡ eɾ eiebɾow in disdain.

"it's xust a kɾasi old tʝnɡ," ʃe said. "i xust slip it on sometimes wen
i don't kaɾe wat i look like."

"but it looks wondeɾful on iou, if iou know wat i mean," puɾswed
mɾs. mkkee. "if t͡ʃesteɾ kould onli xet iou in tat pose i tʝnk e kould
make sometʝnɡ of it."

we aʝ looked in silense at mɾs. wilson wo ɾemobed a stɾand of aiɾ fɾom
obeɾ eɾ eies and looked bakk at us wit a bɾiʝjant smile. mɾ. mkkee
ɾeɡaɾded eɾ intent͡ɬi wit ʝs ead on one side and ten mobed ʝs and
bakk and foɾt slowli in fɾont of ʝs fase.

"i ʃould t͡ʃanxe te liɡt," e said afteɾ a moment. "i'd like to bɾinɡ
out te modeʝinɡ of te featuɾes. and i'd tɾi to xet old of aʝ te
bakk aiɾ."

"i wouldn't tʝnk of t͡ʃanxinɡ te liɡt," kɾjed mɾs. mkkee. "i tʝnk
it's----"

eɾ wsband said "ʃ!" and we aʝ looked at te subxekt aɡain weɾeupon
tom but͡ʃanan iawned audibli and ɡot to ʝs feet.

"iou mkkees abe sometʝnɡ to dɾink," e said. "xet some moɾe ise and
mineɾal wateɾ, miɾt͡ɬe, befoɾe ebeɾibodi ɡoes to sleep."

"i told tat boi about te ise." miɾt͡ɬe ɾaised eɾ eiebɾows in despaiɾ
at te ʃift͡ɬessness of te loweɾ oɾdeɾs. "tese people! iou abe to keep
afteɾ tem aʝ te time."

ʃe looked at me and lauɡed point͡ɬessli. ten ʃe flounsed obeɾ to te
doɡ, kissed it wit ekstasi and swept into te kitt͡ʃen, impliinɡ tat
a dosen t͡ʃefs awaited eɾ oɾdeɾs teɾe.

"i'be done some nise tʝnɡs out on lonɡ island," asseɾted mɾ. mkkee.

tom looked at ʝm blankli.

"two of tem we abe fɾamed downstaiɾs."

"two wat?" demanded tom.

"two studjes. one of tem i kaʝ 'montauk point--te ɡwʝs,' and te
oteɾ i kaʝ 'montauk point--te sea.' "

te sisteɾ kateɾine sat down beside me on te kout͡ʃ.

"do iou libe down on lonɡ island, too?" ʃe inkiɾed.

"i libe at west eɡɡ."

"ɾeaʝi? i was down teɾe at a paɾti about a mont aɡo. at a man named
ɡatsbi's. do iou know ʝm?"

"i libe nekst dooɾ to ʝm."

"weʝ, tei sai e's a nepew oɾ a kousin of kaiseɾ wilelm's. tat's
weɾe aʝ ʝs monei komes fɾom."

"ɾeaʝi?"

ʃe nodded.

"i'm skaɾed of ʝm. i'd ate to abe ʝm xet anitʝnɡ on me."

tʝs absoɾbinɡ infoɾmatjon about mi neiɡboɾ was interupted bi
mɾs. mkkee's pointinɡ suddenli at kateɾine:

"t͡ʃesteɾ, i tʝnk iou kould do sometʝnɡ wit eɾ," ʃe bɾoke out,
but mɾ. mkkee onli nodded in a boɾed wai and tuɾned ʝs attentjon
to tom.

"i'd like to do moɾe woɾk on lonɡ island if i kould xet te entɾi. aʝ
i ask is tat tei ʃould xibe me a staɾt."

"ask miɾt͡ɬe," said tom, bɾeakinɡ into a ʃoɾt ʃout of lauɡteɾ as
mɾs. wilson enteɾed wit a tɾai. "ʃe'ʝ xibe iou a letteɾ of
intɾoduktjon, won't iou, miɾt͡ɬe?"

"do wat?" ʃe asked, staɾt͡ɬed.

"iou'ʝ xibe mkkee a letteɾ of intɾoduktjon to iouɾ wsband, so e kan
do some studjes of ʝm." ʝs lips mobed silent͡ɬi foɾ a moment as e
inbented. " 'xeoɾxe b. wilson at te ɡasoline pump,' oɾ sometʝnɡ like
tat."


kateɾine leaned klose to me and wʝspeɾed in mi eaɾ: "neiteɾ of tem
kan stand te peɾson tei'ɾe marjed to."

"kan't tei?"

"kan't stand tem." ʃe looked at miɾt͡ɬe and ten at tom. "wat i sai is,
wi ɡo on libinɡ wit tem if tei kan't stand tem? if i was tem i'd xet
a diboɾse and xet marjed to eat͡ʃ oteɾ ɾiɡt awai."

"doesn't ʃe like wilson eiteɾ?"

te answeɾ to tʝs was unekspekted. it kame fɾom miɾt͡ɬe wo ad obeɾeaɾd
te kestjon and it was bjolent and obssene.

"iou see?" kɾjed kateɾine tɾjumpant͡ɬi. ʃe loweɾed eɾ boise aɡain.
"it's ɾeaʝi ʝs wife tat's keepinɡ tem apaɾt. ʃe's a katolik and
tei don't beljebe in diboɾse."

daisi was not a katolik and i was a litt͡ɬe ʃokked at te elaboɾateness
of te lje.

"wen tei do xet marjed," kontinwed kateɾine, "tei'ɾe ɡoinɡ west to
libe foɾ a wʝle until it blows obeɾ."

"it'd be moɾe diskɾeet to ɡo to euɾope."

"o, do iou like euɾope?" ʃe eksklaimed suɾpɾisinɡli. "i xust ɡot bakk
fɾom monte kaɾlo."

"ɾeaʝi."

"xust last ieaɾ. i went obeɾ teɾe wit anoteɾ xiɾl."

"stai lonɡ?"

"no, we xust went to monte kaɾlo and bakk. we went bi wai of maɾseiʝes.
we ad obeɾ twelbe wndɾed doʝaɾs wen we staɾted but we ɡot ɡipped
out of it aʝ in two dais in te pɾibate ɾooms. we ad an awful time
xettinɡ bakk, i kan teʝ iou. ɡod, ow i ated tat town!"

te late afteɾnoon ski bloomed in te window foɾ a moment like te blwe
onei of te mediteranean--ten te ʃɾiʝ boise of mɾs. mkkee kaʝed me
bakk into te ɾoom.

"i almost made a mistake, too," ʃe deklaɾed biɡoɾousli. "i almost
marjed a litt͡ɬe kike wo'd been afteɾ me foɾ ieaɾs. i knew e was
below me. ebeɾibodi kept saiinɡ to me: 'lusiʝe, tat man's wai below
iou!' but if i adn't met t͡ʃesteɾ, e'd of ɡot me suɾe."

"ies, but listen," said miɾt͡ɬe wilson, noddinɡ eɾ ead up and down,
"at least iou didn't mari ʝm."

"i know i didn't."

"weʝ, i marjed ʝm," said miɾt͡ɬe, ambiɡwousli. "and tat's te
diffeɾense between iouɾ kase and mine."

"wi did iou, miɾt͡ɬe?" demanded kateɾine. "nobodi foɾsed iou to."

miɾt͡ɬe konsideɾed.

"i marjed ʝm bekause i touɡt e was a xent͡ɬeman," ʃe said finaʝi.
"i touɡt e knew sometʝnɡ about bɾeedinɡ, but e wasn't fit to likk
mi ʃoe."

"iou weɾe kɾasi about ʝm foɾ a wʝle," said kateɾine.

"kɾasi about ʝm!" kɾjed miɾt͡ɬe inkɾedulousli. "wo said i was kɾasi about
ʝm? i nebeɾ was ani moɾe kɾasi about ʝm tan i was about tat man
teɾe."

ʃe pointed suddenli at me, and ebeɾi one looked at me akkusinɡli.
i tɾjed to ʃow bi mi ekspɾessjon tat i ad plaied no paɾt in eɾ past.

"te onli kɾasi i was was wen i marjed ʝm. i knew ɾiɡt awai i made a
mistake. e borowed somebodi's best swit to xet marjed in and nebeɾ
eben told me about it, and te man kame afteɾ it one dai wen e was out.
ʃe looked aɾound to see wo was listeninɡ: " 'o, is tat iouɾ swit?' i 
said.
'tʝs is te fiɾst i ebeɾ eaɾd about it.' but i ɡabe it to ʝm and ten i 
lai down
and kɾjed to beat te band aʝ afteɾnoon."

"ʃe ɾeaʝi ouɡt to xet awai fɾom ʝm," ɾesumed kateɾine to me.
"tei'be been libinɡ obeɾ tat ɡaɾaxe foɾ eleben ieaɾs. and tom's te
fiɾst sweetje ʃe ebeɾ ad."

te bott͡ɬe of wʝskei--a sekond one--was now in konstant demand bi aʝ
pɾesent, eksseptinɡ kateɾine wo "felt xust as ɡood on notʝnɡ at aʝ."
tom ɾanɡ foɾ te xanitoɾ and sent ʝm foɾ some selebɾated sandwit͡ʃes,
wʝt͡ʃ weɾe a komplete suppeɾ in temselbes. i wanted to xet out and walk
eastwaɾd towaɾd te paɾk tɾouɡ te soft twiliɡt but eat͡ʃ time i tɾjed
to ɡo i bekame entanɡled in some wild stɾident aɾɡwment wʝt͡ʃ puʝed me
bakk, as if wit ɾopes, into mi t͡ʃaiɾ. iet ʝɡ obeɾ te siti ouɾ line of
ieʝow windows must abe kontɾibuted teiɾ ʃaɾe of wman sekɾeki to te
kaswal watt͡ʃeɾ in te daɾkeninɡ stɾeets, and i was ʝm too, lookinɡ up and
wondeɾinɡ. i was witʝn and witout, simultaneousli ent͡ʃanted and ɾepeʝed
bi te ineksaustible baɾjeti of life.

miɾt͡ɬe puʝed eɾ t͡ʃaiɾ klose to mine, and suddenli eɾ waɾm bɾeat
pouɾed obeɾ me te stoɾi of eɾ fiɾst meetinɡ wit tom.

"it was on te two litt͡ɬe seats fasinɡ eat͡ʃ oteɾ tat aɾe alwais te
last ones left on te tɾain. i was ɡoinɡ up to new ioɾk to see mi
sisteɾ and spend te niɡt. e ad on a dɾess swit and patent leateɾ
ʃoes and i kouldn't keep mi eies off ʝm but ebeɾi time e looked at
me i ad to pɾetend to be lookinɡ at te adbeɾtisement obeɾ ʝs ead.
wen we kame into te statjon e was nekst to me and ʝs wʝte
ʃiɾt-fɾont pɾessed aɡainst mi aɾm--and so i told ʝm i'd abe to kaʝ
a poliseman, but e knew i ljed. i was so ekssited tat wen i ɡot into
a taksi wit ʝm i didn't aɾdli know i wasn't xettinɡ into a subwai
tɾain. aʝ i kept tʝnkinɡ about, obeɾ and obeɾ, was 'iou kan't libe
foɾebeɾ, iou kan't libe foɾebeɾ.' "

ʃe tuɾned to mɾs. mkkee and te ɾoom ɾanɡ fuʝ of eɾ aɾtifisial
lauɡteɾ.

"mi deaɾ," ʃe kɾjed, "i'm ɡoinɡ to xibe iou tʝs dɾess as soon as i'm
tɾouɡ wit it. i'be ɡot to xet anoteɾ one tomorow. i'm ɡoinɡ to
make a list of aʝ te tʝnɡs i'be ɡot to xet. a massaxe and a wabe
and a koʝaɾ foɾ te doɡ and one of tose kute litt͡ɬe aʃ-tɾais weɾe
iou tout͡ʃ a spɾinɡ, and a wɾeat wit a blakk silk bow foɾ moteɾ's
ɡɾabe tat'ʝ last aʝ summeɾ. i ɡot to wɾite down a list so i won't
foɾxet aʝ te tʝnɡs i ɡot to do."

it was nine o'klokk--almost immedjateli afteɾwaɾd i looked at mi watt͡ʃ
and found it was ten. mɾ. mkkee was asleep on a t͡ʃaiɾ wit ʝs fists
klent͡ʃed in ʝs lap, like a potoɡɾap of a man of aktjon. takinɡ out mi
andkeɾt͡ʃjef i wiped fɾom ʝs t͡ʃeek te ɾemains of te spot of dɾjed
lateɾ tat ad worjed me aʝ te afteɾnoon.

te litt͡ɬe doɡ was sittinɡ on te table lookinɡ wit blind eies tɾouɡ
te smoke and fɾom time to time ɡɾoaninɡ faint͡ɬi. people disappeaɾed,
ɾeappeaɾed, made plans to ɡo someweɾe, and ten lost eat͡ʃ oteɾ,
seaɾt͡ʃed foɾ eat͡ʃ oteɾ, found eat͡ʃ oteɾ a few feet awai. some time
towaɾd midniɡt tom but͡ʃanan and mɾs. wilson stood fase to fase
diskussinɡ in impassjoned boises weteɾ mɾs. wilson ad ani ɾiɡt to
mentjon daisi's name.

"daisi! daisi! daisi!" ʃouted mɾs. wilson. "i'ʝ sai it wenebeɾ i want
to! daisi! dai----"

makinɡ a ʃoɾt deft mobement tom but͡ʃanan bɾoke eɾ nose wit ʝs
open and.

ten teɾe weɾe bloodi towels upon te batɾoom flooɾ, and women's
boises skoldinɡ, and ʝɡ obeɾ te konfusjon a lonɡ bɾoken wail of
pain. mɾ. mkkee awoke fɾom ʝs dose and staɾted in a dase towaɾd te dooɾ.
wen e ad ɡone alf wai e tuɾned aɾound and staɾed at te ssene--ʝs
wife and kateɾine skoldinɡ and konsolinɡ as tei stumbled eɾe and
teɾe amonɡ te kɾowded fuɾnituɾe wit aɾtikles of aid, and te
despaiɾinɡ fiɡwɾe on te kout͡ʃ bleedinɡ flwent͡ɬi and tɾiinɡ to spɾead
a kopi of "town tatt͡ɬe" obeɾ te tapestɾi ssenes of beɾsaiʝes.
ten mɾ. mkkee tuɾned and kontinwed on out te dooɾ. takinɡ mi at fɾom
te t͡ʃandeljeɾ i foʝowed.

"kome to lunt͡ʃ some dai," e suɡxested, as we ɡɾoaned down in te
elebatoɾ.

"weɾe?"

"aniweɾe."

"keep iouɾ ands off te lebeɾ," snapped te elebatoɾ boi.

"i beɡ iouɾ paɾdon," said mɾ. mkkee wit diɡniti, "i didn't know i was
tout͡ʃinɡ it."

"aʝ ɾiɡt," i aɡɾeed, "i'ʝ be ɡlad to."

. . . i was standinɡ beside ʝs bed and e was sittinɡ up between te
ʃeets, klad in ʝs undeɾweaɾ, wit a ɡɾeat poɾtfoljo in ʝs ands.

"beauti and te beast . . . loneliness . . . old ɡɾoseɾi oɾse . . .
bɾook'n bɾidxe . . . ."

ten i was liinɡ alf asleep in te kold loweɾ lebel of te pennsilbanja
statjon, staɾinɡ at te moɾninɡ "tɾibune" and waitinɡ foɾ te fouɾ
o'klokk tɾain.




t͡ʃapteɾ 3



teɾe was musik fɾom mi neiɡboɾ's ouse tɾouɡ te summeɾ niɡts. in
ʝs blwe ɡaɾdens men and xiɾls kame and went like mots amonɡ te
wʝspeɾinɡs and te t͡ʃampaɡne and te staɾs. at ʝɡ tide in te
afteɾnoon i watt͡ʃed ʝs ɡests dibinɡ fɾom te toweɾ of ʝs ɾaft oɾ
takinɡ te sun on te ot sand of ʝs beat͡ʃ wʝle ʝs two motoɾ-boats
slit te wateɾs of te sound, dɾawinɡ akaplanes obeɾ kataɾakts of
foam. on week-ends ʝs ɾoʝs-ɾoise bekame an omnibus, beaɾinɡ paɾtjes
to and fɾom te siti, between nine in te moɾninɡ and lonɡ past
midniɡt, wʝle ʝs statjon waɡon skampeɾed like a bɾisk ieʝow buɡ to
meet aʝ tɾains. and on mondais eiɡt seɾbants inkludinɡ an ekstɾa
ɡaɾdeneɾ toiled aʝ dai wit mops and skɾubbinɡ-bɾuʃes and ammeɾs
and ɡaɾden-ʃeaɾs, ɾepaiɾinɡ te ɾabaxes of te niɡt befoɾe.

ebeɾi fɾidai fibe kɾates of oɾanxes and lemons aribed fɾom a fɾwiteɾeɾ
in new ioɾk--ebeɾi mondai tese same oɾanxes and lemons left ʝs bakk
dooɾ in a piɾamid of pulpless albes. teɾe was a mat͡ʃine in te
kitt͡ʃen wʝt͡ʃ kould ekstɾakt te xwise of two wndɾed oɾanxes in alf an
ouɾ, if a litt͡ɬe button was pɾessed two wndɾed times bi a but͡ɬeɾ's
twmb.

at least onse a foɾtniɡt a koɾps of kateɾeɾs kame down wit sebeɾal
wndɾed feet of kanbas and enouɡ koloɾed liɡts to make a t͡ʃɾistmas
tɾee of ɡatsbi's enoɾmous ɡaɾden. on buffet tables, ɡaɾniʃed wit
ɡlisteninɡ oɾs-d'oeubɾe, spised baked ams kɾowded aɡainst salads of
aɾlekin desiɡns and pastɾi piɡs and tuɾkeis bewitt͡ʃed to a daɾk ɡold.
in te main aʝ a baɾ wit a ɾeal bɾass ɾail was set up, and stokked
wit xins and likoɾs and wit koɾdjals so lonɡ foɾɡotten tat most of
ʝs female ɡests weɾe too iounɡ to know one fɾom anoteɾ.

bi seben o'klokk te oɾt͡ʃestɾa as aribed--no tʝn fibe-pjese affaiɾ
but a wole pitful of oboes and tɾombones and saksopones and bjols and
koɾnets and pikkolos and low and ʝɡ dɾums. te last swimmeɾs abe
kome in fɾom te beat͡ʃ now and aɾe dɾessinɡ upstaiɾs; te kaɾs fɾom
new ioɾk aɾe paɾked fibe deep in te dɾibe, and alɾeadi te aʝs and
salons and beɾandas aɾe ɡaudi wit pɾimaɾi koloɾs and aiɾ ʃoɾn in
stɾanxe new wais and ʃawls beiond te dɾeams of kastile. te
baɾ is in fuʝ swinɡ and floatinɡ ɾounds of kokktails peɾmeate te
ɡaɾden outside until te aiɾ is alibe wit t͡ʃatteɾ and lauɡteɾ and
kaswal innwendo and intɾoduktjons foɾɡotten on te spot and
entwsjastik meetinɡs between women wo nebeɾ knew eat͡ʃ oteɾ's names.

te liɡts ɡɾow bɾiɡteɾ as te eaɾt luɾt͡ʃes awai fɾom te sun and
now te oɾt͡ʃestɾa is plaiinɡ ieʝow kokktail musik and te opeɾa of
boises pitt͡ʃes a kei ʝɡeɾ. lauɡteɾ is easjeɾ, minute bi minute,
spiʝed wit pɾodiɡaliti, tipped out at a t͡ʃeeɾful woɾd. te ɡɾoups
t͡ʃanxe moɾe swift͡ɬi, sweʝ wit new aribals, dissolbe and foɾm in te
same bɾeat--alɾeadi teɾe aɾe wandeɾeɾs, konfident xiɾls wo weabe
eɾe and teɾe amonɡ te stouteɾ and moɾe stable, bekome foɾ a ʃaɾp,
xoious moment te senteɾ of a ɡɾoup and ten ekssited wit tɾjump
ɡlide on tɾouɡ te sea-t͡ʃanxe of fases and boises and koloɾ undeɾ te
konstant͡ɬi t͡ʃanxinɡ liɡt.

suddenli one of tese ɡipsjes in tɾemblinɡ opal, seises a kokktail out
of te aiɾ, dumps it down foɾ kouɾaxe and mobinɡ eɾ ands like
fɾisko danses out alone on te kanbas platfoɾm. a momentaɾi wʃ; te
oɾt͡ʃestɾa leadeɾ baɾjes ʝs ɾitm oblixinɡli foɾ eɾ and teɾe is a
buɾst of t͡ʃatteɾ as te eroneous news ɡoes aɾound tat ʃe is xilda
ɡɾai's undeɾstudi fɾom te "foʝjes." te paɾti as beɡwn.

i beljebe tat on te fiɾst niɡt i went to ɡatsbi's ouse i was one of
te few ɡests wo ad aktwaʝi been inbited. people weɾe not
inbited--tei went teɾe. tei ɡot into automobiles wʝt͡ʃ boɾe tem out
to lonɡ island and someow tei ended up at ɡatsbi's dooɾ. onse teɾe
tei weɾe intɾodused bi somebodi wo knew ɡatsbi and afteɾ tat tei
kondukted temselbes akkoɾdinɡ to te ɾules of beabjoɾ assosiated wit
amusement paɾks. sometimes tei kame and went witout abinɡ met ɡatsbi
at aʝ, kame foɾ te paɾti wit a simplisiti of eaɾt tat was its own
tikket of admissjon.

i ad been aktwaʝi inbited. a t͡ʃauffeuɾ in a unifoɾm of ɾobin's eɡɡ
blwe kɾossed mi lawn eaɾli tat satuɾdai moɾninɡ wit a suɾpɾisinɡli
foɾmal note fɾom ʝs emploieɾ--te onoɾ would be entiɾeli ɡatsbi's, it
said, if i would attend ʝs "litt͡ɬe paɾti" tat niɡt. e ad
seen me sebeɾal times and ad intended to kaʝ on me lonɡ befoɾe
but a pekuljaɾ kombinatjon of siɾkumstanses ad pɾebented it--siɡned
xai ɡatsbi in a maxestik and.

dɾessed up in wʝte flannels i went obeɾ to ʝs lawn a litt͡ɬe afteɾ
seben and wandeɾed aɾound ɾateɾ iʝ-at-ease amonɡ swiɾls and eddjes
of people i didn't know--touɡ eɾe and teɾe was a fase i ad notised
on te kommutinɡ tɾain. i was immedjateli stɾukk bi te numbeɾ of iounɡ
enɡliʃmen dotted about; aʝ weʝ dɾessed, aʝ lookinɡ a litt͡ɬe wnɡɾi
and aʝ talkinɡ in low eaɾnest boises to solid and pɾospeɾous
ameɾikans. i was suɾe tat tei weɾe seʝinɡ sometʝnɡ: bonds oɾ
insuɾanse oɾ automobiles. tei weɾe, at least, aɡonisinɡli awaɾe of te
easi monei in te bisiniti and konbinsed tat it was teiɾs foɾ a few
woɾds in te ɾiɡt kei.

as soon as i aribed i made an attempt to find mi ost but te two oɾ
tɾee people of wom i asked ʝs weɾeabouts staɾed at me in sut͡ʃ an
amased wai and denjed so beement͡ɬi ani knowledxe of ʝs mobements
tat i slunk off in te diɾektjon of te kokktail table--te onli plase
in te ɡaɾden weɾe a sinɡle man kould linxeɾ witout lookinɡ
puɾposeless and alone.

i was on mi wai to xet ɾoaɾinɡ dɾunk fɾom ʃeeɾ embarassment wen
xoɾdan bakeɾ kame out of te ouse and stood at te ead of te maɾble
steps, leaninɡ a litt͡ɬe bakkwaɾd and lookinɡ wit kontemptwous inteɾest
down into te ɡaɾden.

welkome oɾ not, i found it nesessaɾi to attat͡ʃ miself to someone
befoɾe i ʃould bexin to addɾess koɾdjal ɾemaɾks to te passeɾs-bi.

"eʝo!" i ɾoaɾed, adbansinɡ towaɾd eɾ. mi boise seemed unnatuɾaʝi
loud akɾoss te ɡaɾden.

"i touɡt iou miɡt be eɾe," ʃe ɾesponded absent͡ɬi as i kame up.
"i ɾemembeɾed iou libed nekst dooɾ to----"

ʃe eld mi and impeɾsonaʝi, as a pɾomise tat ʃe'd take kaɾe
of me in a minute, and ɡabe eaɾ to two xiɾls in twin ieʝow dɾesses
wo stopped at te foot of te steps.

"eʝo!" tei kɾjed toxeteɾ. "sori iou didn't win."

tat was foɾ te ɡolf touɾnament. ʃe ad lost in te finals te week
befoɾe.

"iou don't know wo we aɾe," said one of te xiɾls in ieʝow, "but we
met iou eɾe about a mont aɡo."

"iou'be died iouɾ aiɾ sinse ten," ɾemaɾked xoɾdan, and i staɾted
but te xiɾls ad mobed kaswaʝi on and eɾ ɾemaɾk was addɾessed to te
pɾematuɾe moon, pɾodused like te suppeɾ, no doubt, out of a kateɾeɾ's
basket. wit xoɾdan's slendeɾ ɡolden aɾm ɾestinɡ in mine we dessended
te steps and saunteɾed about te ɡaɾden. a tɾai of kokktails floated at
us tɾouɡ te twiliɡt and we sat down at a table wit te two xiɾls in
ieʝow and tɾee men, eat͡ʃ one intɾodused to us as mɾ. mumble.

"do iou kome to tese paɾtjes often?" inkiɾed xoɾdan of te xiɾl
beside eɾ.

"te last one was te one i met iou at," answeɾed te xiɾl, in an aleɾt,
konfident boise. ʃe tuɾned to eɾ kompanjon: "wasn't it foɾ iou,
lusiʝe?"

it was foɾ lusiʝe, too.

"i like to kome," lusiʝe said. "i nebeɾ kaɾe wat i do, so i alwais abe
a ɡood time. wen i was eɾe last i toɾe mi ɡown on a t͡ʃaiɾ, and e asked
me mi name and addɾess--inside of a week i ɡot a pakkaxe fɾom kɾoiɾjeɾ's
wit a new ebeninɡ ɡown in it."

"did iou keep it?" asked xoɾdan.

"suɾe i did. i was ɡoinɡ to weaɾ it toniɡt, but it was too biɡ in te
bust and ad to be alteɾed. it was ɡas blwe wit labendeɾ beads. two
wndɾed and siksti-fibe doʝaɾs."

"teɾe's sometʝnɡ funni about a feʝow tat'ʝ do a tʝnɡ like tat,"
said te oteɾ xiɾl eaxeɾli. "e doesn't want ani tɾouble wit anibodi."

"wo doesn't?" i inkiɾed.

"ɡatsbi. somebodi told me----"

te two xiɾls and xoɾdan leaned toxeteɾ konfidentjaʝi.

"somebodi told me tei touɡt e kiʝed a man onse."

a tɾiʝ passed obeɾ aʝ of us. te tɾee mɾ. mumbles bent foɾwaɾd and
listened eaxeɾli.

"i don't tʝnk it's so mut͡ʃ tat," aɾɡed lusiʝe skeptikaʝi; "it's
moɾe tat e was a xeɾman spi duɾinɡ te waɾ."

one of te men nodded in konfiɾmatjon.

"i eaɾd tat fɾom a man wo knew aʝ about ʝm, ɡɾew up wit ʝm in
xeɾmani," e assuɾed us positibeli.

"o, no," said te fiɾst xiɾl, "it kouldn't be tat, bekause e was in
te ameɾikan aɾmi duɾinɡ te waɾ." as ouɾ kɾeduliti switt͡ʃed bakk to
eɾ ʃe leaned foɾwaɾd wit entwsjasm. "iou look at ʝm sometimes wen
e tʝnks nobodi's lookinɡ at ʝm. i'ʝ bet e kiʝed a man."

ʃe narowed eɾ eies and ʃibeɾed. lusiʝe ʃibeɾed. we aʝ tuɾned and
looked aɾound foɾ ɡatsbi. it was testimoni to te ɾomantik spekulatjon e
inspiɾed tat teɾe weɾe wʝspeɾs about ʝm fɾom tose wo found litt͡ɬe
tat it was nesessaɾi to wʝspeɾ about in tʝs woɾld.

te fiɾst suppeɾ--teɾe would be anoteɾ one afteɾ midniɡt--was now
beinɡ seɾbed, and xoɾdan inbited me to xoin eɾ own paɾti wo weɾe
spɾead aɾound a table on te oteɾ side of te ɡaɾden. teɾe weɾe
tɾee marjed kouples and xoɾdan's eskoɾt, a peɾsistent undeɾɡɾadwate
xiben to bjolent innwendo and obbjousli undeɾ te impɾessjon
tat sooneɾ oɾ lateɾ xoɾdan was ɡoinɡ to ijeld ʝm up eɾ peɾson
to a ɡɾeateɾ oɾ lesseɾ deɡɾee. instead of ɾamblinɡ tʝs paɾti
ad pɾeseɾbed a diɡnifjed omoxeneiti, and assumed to itself te
funktjon of ɾepɾesentinɡ te staid nobiliti of te kountɾiside--east
eɡɡ kondessendinɡ to west eɡɡ, and kaɾefuʝi on ɡwaɾd aɡainst its
spektɾoskopik ɡaieti.

"let's xet out," wʝspeɾed xoɾdan, afteɾ a someow wasteful and
inappɾopɾjate alf ouɾ. "tʝs is mut͡ʃ too polite foɾ me."

we ɡot up, and ʃe eksplained tat we weɾe ɡoinɡ to find te ost--i
ad nebeɾ met ʝm, ʃe said, and it was makinɡ me uneasi. te
undeɾɡɾadwate nodded in a kinikal, melant͡ʃoli wai.

te baɾ, weɾe we ɡlansed fiɾst, was kɾowded but ɡatsbi was not teɾe.
ʃe kouldn't find ʝm fɾom te top of te steps, and e wasn't on te
beɾanda. on a t͡ʃanse we tɾjed an impoɾtant-lookinɡ dooɾ, and walked
into a ʝɡ ɡotʝk libɾaɾi, paneʝed wit kaɾbed enɡliʃ oak, and
pɾobabli tɾanspoɾted komplete fɾom some ɾwin obeɾseas.

a stout, middle-axed man wit enoɾmous owl-eied spektakles was
sittinɡ somewat dɾunk on te edxe of a ɡɾeat table, staɾinɡ wit
unsteadi konsentɾatjon at te ʃelbes of books. as we enteɾed e
weeled ekssitedli aɾound and eksamined xoɾdan fɾom ead to foot.

"wat do iou tʝnk?" e demanded impetwousli.

"about wat?"

e wabed ʝs and towaɾd te book-ʃelbes.

"about tat. as a matteɾ of fakt iou needn't boteɾ to asseɾtain. i
asseɾtained. tei'ɾe ɾeal."

"te books?"

e nodded.

"absoluteli ɾeal--abe paxes and ebeɾitʝnɡ. i touɡt tei'd be a nise
duɾable kaɾdboaɾd. matteɾ of fakt, tei'ɾe absoluteli ɾeal. paxes
and--eɾe! lemme ʃow iou."

takinɡ ouɾ skeptisism foɾ ɡɾanted, e ɾuʃed to te bookkases and
ɾetuɾned wit bolume one of te "stoddaɾd lektuɾes."

"see!" e kɾjed tɾjumpant͡ɬi. "it's a bona fide pjese of pɾinted matteɾ.
it fooled me. tʝs feʝa's a ɾeɡwlaɾ belasko. it's a tɾjump. wat
toɾouɡness! wat ɾealism! knew wen to stop too--didn't kut te paxes.
but wat do iou want? wat do iou ekspekt?"

e snatt͡ʃed te book fɾom me and ɾeplased it astili on its ʃelf
mutteɾinɡ tat if one bɾikk was ɾemobed te wole libɾaɾi was ljable
to koʝapse.

"wo bɾouɡt iou?" e demanded. "oɾ did iou xust kome? i was bɾouɡt.
most people weɾe bɾouɡt."

xoɾdan looked at ʝm aleɾt͡ɬi, t͡ʃeeɾfuʝi witout answeɾinɡ.

"i was bɾouɡt bi a woman named ɾoosebelt," e kontinwed. "mɾs. klaud
ɾoosebelt. do iou know eɾ? i met eɾ someweɾe last niɡt. i'be
been dɾunk foɾ about a week now, and i touɡt it miɡt sobeɾ me
up to sit in a libɾaɾi."

"as it?"

"a litt͡ɬe bit, i tʝnk. i kan't teʝ iet. i'be onli been eɾe
an ouɾ. did i teʝ iou about te books? tei'ɾe ɾeal. tei'ɾe----"

"iou told us."

we ʃook ands wit ʝm ɡɾabeli and went bakk outdooɾs.

teɾe was dansinɡ now on te kanbas in te ɡaɾden, old men puʃinɡ
iounɡ xiɾls bakkwaɾd in eteɾnal ɡɾaseless siɾkles, supeɾjoɾ kouples
oldinɡ eat͡ʃ oteɾ toɾtwousli, faʃjonabli and keepinɡ in te
koɾneɾs--and a ɡɾeat numbeɾ of sinɡle xiɾls dansinɡ indibidwalistikaʝi
oɾ ɾeljebinɡ te oɾt͡ʃestɾa foɾ a moment of te buɾden of te banxo oɾ
te tɾaps. bi midniɡt te ʝlaɾiti ad inkɾeased. a selebɾated tenoɾ ad
sunɡ in italjan and a notoɾjous kontɾalto ad sunɡ in xass and between
te numbeɾs people weɾe doinɡ "stunts" aʝ obeɾ te ɡaɾden, wʝle appi
bakwous buɾsts of lauɡteɾ ɾose towaɾd te summeɾ ski. a paiɾ of staxe
"twins"--wo tuɾned out to be te xiɾls in ieʝow--did a babi akt in
kostume and t͡ʃampaɡne was seɾbed in ɡlasses biɡxeɾ tan finxeɾ bowls.
te moon ad ɾisen ʝɡeɾ, and floatinɡ in te sound was a tɾjanɡle of
silbeɾ skales, tɾemblinɡ a litt͡ɬe to te stiff, tinni dɾip of te
banxoes on te lawn.

i was stiʝ wit xoɾdan bakeɾ. we weɾe sittinɡ at a table wit a man of
about mi axe and a ɾowdi litt͡ɬe xiɾl wo ɡabe wai upon te sliɡtest
pɾobokatjon to unkontɾoʝable lauɡteɾ. i was enxoiinɡ miself now. i
ad taken two finxeɾ bowls of t͡ʃampaɡne and te ssene ad t͡ʃanxed
befoɾe mi eies into sometʝnɡ siɡnifikant, elemental and pɾofound.

at a luʝ in te enteɾtainment te man looked at me and smiled.

"iouɾ fase is familjaɾ," e said, politeli. "weɾen't iou in te tʝɾd
dibisjon duɾinɡ te waɾ?"

"wi, ies. i was in te nint mat͡ʃine-ɡwn battaljon."

"i was in te sebent infantɾi until xune nineteen-eiɡteen. i knew i'd
seen iou someweɾe befoɾe."

we talked foɾ a moment about some wet, ɡɾei litt͡ɬe biʝaxes in fɾanse.
ebident͡ɬi e libed in tʝs bisiniti foɾ e told me tat e ad xust
bouɡt a idɾoplane and was ɡoinɡ to tɾi it out in te moɾninɡ.

"want to ɡo wit me, old spoɾt? xust neaɾ te ʃoɾe alonɡ te sound."

"wat time?"

"ani time tat swits iou best."

it was on te tip of mi tonɡe to ask ʝs name wen xoɾdan looked aɾound
and smiled.

"abinɡ a ɡai time now?" ʃe inkiɾed.

"mut͡ʃ betteɾ." i tuɾned aɡain to mi new akkaintanse. "tʝs is an unuswal
paɾti foɾ me. i aben't eben seen te ost. i libe obeɾ teɾe----" i wabed
mi and at te inbisible edxe in te distanse, "and tʝs man ɡatsbi sent
obeɾ ʝs t͡ʃauffeuɾ wit an inbitatjon."

foɾ a moment e looked at me as if e failed to undeɾstand.

"i'm ɡatsbi," e said suddenli.

"wat!" i eksklaimed. "o, i beɡ iouɾ paɾdon."

"i touɡt iou knew, old spoɾt. i'm afɾaid i'm not a beɾi ɡood ost."

e smiled undeɾstandinɡli--mut͡ʃ moɾe tan undeɾstandinɡli. it was
one of tose ɾaɾe smiles wit a kaliti of eteɾnal ɾeassuɾanse
in it, tat iou mai kome akɾoss fouɾ oɾ fibe times in life. it fased--oɾ
seemed to fase--te wole eksteɾnal woɾld foɾ an instant, and ten
konsentɾated on iou wit an iresistible pɾexudise in iouɾ faboɾ. it
undeɾstood iou xust so faɾ as iou wanted to be undeɾstood, beljebed in
iou as iou would like to beljebe in iouɾself and assuɾed iou tat it
ad pɾesiseli te impɾessjon of iou tat, at iouɾ best, iou oped to
konbei. pɾesiseli at tat point it baniʃed--and i was lookinɡ at an
eleɡant iounɡ ɾouɡ-nekk, a ieaɾ oɾ two obeɾ tʝɾti, wose elaboɾate
foɾmaliti of speet͡ʃ xust missed beinɡ absuɾd. some time befoɾe e
intɾodused ʝmself i'd ɡot a stɾonɡ impɾessjon tat e was pikkinɡ ʝs
woɾds wit kaɾe.

almost at te moment wen mɾ. ɡatsbi identifjed ʝmself a but͡ɬeɾ
wrjed towaɾd ʝm wit te infoɾmatjon tat t͡ʃikaɡo was kaʝinɡ ʝm on
te wiɾe. e ekskused ʝmself wit a smaʝ bow tat inkluded eat͡ʃ of us
in tuɾn.

"if iou want anitʝnɡ xust ask foɾ it, old spoɾt," e uɾxed me.
"ekskuse me. i wiʝ ɾexoin iou lateɾ."

wen e was ɡone i tuɾned immedjateli to xoɾdan--konstɾained to assuɾe eɾ
of mi suɾpɾise. i ad ekspekted tat mɾ. ɡatsbi would be a floɾid and
koɾpulent peɾson in ʝs middle ieaɾs.

"wo is e?" i demanded. "do iou know?"

"e's xust a man named ɡatsbi."

"weɾe is e fɾom, i mean? and wat does e do?"

"now iou'ɾe staɾted on te subxekt," ʃe answeɾed wit a wan smile.
"weʝ,--e told me onse e was an oksfoɾd man."

a dim bakkɡɾound staɾted to take ʃape beʝnd ʝm but at eɾ
nekst ɾemaɾk it faded awai.

"owebeɾ, i don't beljebe it."

"wi not?"

"i don't know," ʃe insisted, "i xust don't tʝnk e went teɾe."

sometʝnɡ in eɾ tone ɾeminded me of te oteɾ xiɾl's "i tʝnk
e kiʝed a man," and ad te effekt of stimulatinɡ mi kuɾjositi. i
would abe aksepted witout kestjon te infoɾmatjon tat ɡatsbi spɾanɡ
fɾom te swamps of lowisjana oɾ fɾom te loweɾ east side of new ioɾk.
tat was kompɾeensible. but iounɡ men didn't--at least in mi pɾobinsial
inekspeɾjense i beljebed tei didn't--dɾift kooʝi out of noweɾe and bui
a palase on lonɡ island sound.

"aniow e xibes laɾxe paɾtjes," said xoɾdan, t͡ʃanxinɡ te subxekt
wit an uɾbane distaste foɾ te konkɾete. "and i like laɾxe paɾtjes.
tei'ɾe so intimate. at smaʝ paɾtjes teɾe isn't ani pɾibaki."

teɾe was te boom of a bass dɾum, and te boise of te oɾt͡ʃestɾa leadeɾ
ɾanɡ out suddenli abobe te et͡ʃolalja of te ɡaɾden.

"ladjes and xent͡ɬemen," e kɾjed. "at te ɾekest of mɾ. ɡatsbi we aɾe
ɡoinɡ to plai foɾ iou mɾ. bladimiɾ tostoff's latest woɾk wʝt͡ʃ attɾakted
so mut͡ʃ attentjon at kaɾnexie aʝ last mai. if iou ɾead te papeɾs
iou know teɾe was a biɡ sensatjon." e smiled wit xobjal kondessensjon
and added "some sensatjon!" weɾeupon ebeɾibodi lauɡed.

"te pjese is known," e konkluded lustili, "as 'bladimiɾ tostoff's
xass ʝstoɾi of te woɾld.' "

te natuɾe of mɾ. tostoff's kompositjon eluded me, bekause xust as
it beɡan mi eies feʝ on ɡatsbi, standinɡ alone on te maɾble steps
and lookinɡ fɾom one ɡɾoup to anoteɾ wit appɾobinɡ eies.
ʝs tanned skin was dɾawn attɾaktibeli tiɡt on ʝs fase and
ʝs ʃoɾt aiɾ looked as touɡ it weɾe tɾimmed ebeɾi dai. i kould
see notʝnɡ sinisteɾ about ʝm. i wondeɾed if te fakt tat e was
not dɾinkinɡ elped to set ʝm off fɾom ʝs ɡests, foɾ it seemed
to me tat e ɡɾew moɾe korekt as te fɾateɾnal ʝlaɾiti inkɾeased.
wen te "xass ʝstoɾi of te woɾld" was obeɾ xiɾls weɾe puttinɡ
teiɾ eads on men's ʃouldeɾs in a puppiiʃ, konbibjal wai, xiɾls weɾe
swooninɡ bakkwaɾd plaifuʝi into men's aɾms, eben into ɡɾoups knowinɡ
tat some one would arest teiɾ faʝs--but no one swooned bakkwaɾd on
ɡatsbi and no fɾent͡ʃ bob tout͡ʃed ɡatsbi's ʃouldeɾ and no sinxinɡ
kaɾtets weɾe foɾmed wit ɡatsbi's ead foɾ one link.

"i beɡ iouɾ paɾdon."

ɡatsbi's but͡ɬeɾ was suddenli standinɡ beside us.

"miss bakeɾ?" e inkiɾed. "i beɡ iouɾ paɾdon but mɾ. ɡatsbi would like
to speak to iou alone."

"wit me?" ʃe eksklaimed in suɾpɾise.

"ies, madame."

ʃe ɡot up slowli, ɾaisinɡ eɾ eiebɾows at me in astoniʃment,
and foʝowed te but͡ɬeɾ towaɾd te ouse. i notised tat ʃe woɾe
eɾ ebeninɡ dɾess, aʝ eɾ dɾesses, like spoɾts klotes--teɾe
was a xauntiness about eɾ mobements as if ʃe ad fiɾst leaɾned to
walk upon ɡolf kouɾses on klean, kɾisp moɾninɡs.

i was alone and it was almost two. foɾ some time konfused and
intɾiɡinɡ sounds ad isswed fɾom a lonɡ mani-windowed ɾoom wʝt͡ʃ
obeɾwnɡ te terase. eludinɡ xoɾdan's undeɾɡɾadwate wo was now
enɡaxed in an obstetɾikal konbeɾsatjon wit two t͡ʃoɾus xiɾls, and wo
imploɾed me to xoin ʝm, i went inside.

te laɾxe ɾoom was fuʝ of people. one of te xiɾls in ieʝow was
plaiinɡ te pjano and beside eɾ stood a taʝ, ɾed aiɾed iounɡ ladi
fɾom a famous t͡ʃoɾus, enɡaxed in sonɡ. ʃe ad dɾunk a kantiti of
t͡ʃampaɡne and duɾinɡ te kouɾse of eɾ sonɡ ʃe ad desided inept͡ɬi
tat ebeɾitʝnɡ was beɾi beɾi sad--ʃe was not onli sinxinɡ, ʃe was
weepinɡ too. wenebeɾ teɾe was a pause in te sonɡ ʃe fiʝed it wit
ɡaspinɡ bɾoken sobs and ten took up te liɾik aɡain in a kabeɾinɡ
sopɾano. te teaɾs kouɾsed down eɾ t͡ʃeeks--not fɾeeli, owebeɾ, foɾ wen
tei kame into kontakt wit eɾ eabili beaded eielaʃes tei assumed an
inki koloɾ, and puɾswed te ɾest of teiɾ wai in slow blakk ɾibulets. a
wmoɾous suɡxestjon was made tat ʃe sinɡ te notes on eɾ fase
weɾeupon ʃe tɾew up eɾ ands, sank into a t͡ʃaiɾ and went off into
a deep binous sleep.

"ʃe ad a fiɡt wit a man wo sais e's eɾ wsband," eksplained a
xiɾl at mi elbow.

i looked aɾound. most of te ɾemaininɡ women weɾe now abinɡ fiɡts
wit men said to be teiɾ wsbands. eben xoɾdan's paɾti, te kaɾtet
fɾom east eɡɡ, weɾe ɾent asundeɾ bi dissensjon. one of te men was
talkinɡ wit kuɾjous intensiti to a iounɡ aktɾess, and ʝs wife afteɾ
attemptinɡ to lauɡ at te sitwatjon in a diɡnifjed and indiffeɾent
wai bɾoke down entiɾeli and ɾesoɾted to flank attakks--at inteɾbals ʃe
appeaɾed suddenli at ʝs side like an anɡɾi djamond, and ʝssed "iou
pɾomised!" into ʝs eaɾ.

te ɾeluktanse to ɡo ome was not konfined to waiwaɾd men. te aʝ was at
pɾesent okkupjed bi two deploɾabli sobeɾ men and teiɾ ʝɡli indiɡnant
wibes. te wibes weɾe simpatʝsinɡ wit eat͡ʃ oteɾ in sliɡt͡ɬi ɾaised
boises.

"wenebeɾ e sees i'm abinɡ a ɡood time e wants to ɡo ome."

"nebeɾ eaɾd anitʝnɡ so selfiʃ in mi life."

"we'ɾe alwais te fiɾst ones to leabe."

"so aɾe we."

"weʝ, we'ɾe almost te last toniɡt," said one of te men ʃeepiʃli.
"te oɾt͡ʃestɾa left alf an ouɾ aɡo."

in spite of te wibes' aɡɾeement tat sut͡ʃ malebolense was beiond
kɾedibiliti, te dispute ended in a ʃoɾt stɾuɡɡle, and bot wibes weɾe
lifted kikkinɡ into te niɡt.

as i waited foɾ mi at in te aʝ te dooɾ of te libɾaɾi opened and
xoɾdan bakeɾ and ɡatsbi kame out toxeteɾ. e was saiinɡ some last woɾd
to eɾ but te eaxeɾness in ʝs manneɾ tiɡtened abɾupt͡ɬi into
foɾmaliti as sebeɾal people appɾoat͡ʃed ʝm to sai ɡoodbie.

xoɾdan's paɾti weɾe kaʝinɡ impatjent͡ɬi to eɾ fɾom te poɾt͡ʃ but ʃe
linxeɾed foɾ a moment to ʃake ands.

"i'be xust eaɾd te most amasinɡ tʝnɡ," ʃe wʝspeɾed. "ow lonɡ weɾe
we in teɾe?"

"wi,--about an ouɾ."

"it was--simpli amasinɡ," ʃe ɾepeated abstɾaktedli. "but i swoɾe
i wouldn't teʝ it and eɾe i am tantalisinɡ iou." ʃe iawned
ɡɾasefuʝi in mi fase. "please kome and see me. . . . pone book.
. . . undeɾ te name of mɾs. siɡouɾnei owaɾd. . . . mi aunt. . . ."
ʃe was wriinɡ off as ʃe talked--eɾ bɾown and wabed a
xaunti salute as ʃe melted into eɾ paɾti at te dooɾ.

ɾateɾ aʃamed tat on mi fiɾst appeaɾanse i ad staied so late, i
xoined te last of ɡatsbi's ɡests wo weɾe klusteɾed aɾound ʝm. i
wanted to eksplain tat i'd wnted foɾ ʝm eaɾli in te ebeninɡ and to
apoloxise foɾ not abinɡ known ʝm in te ɡaɾden.

"don't mentjon it," e enxoined me eaxeɾli. "don't xibe it anoteɾ
touɡt, old spoɾt." te familjaɾ ekspɾessjon eld no moɾe familjaɾiti
tan te and wʝt͡ʃ ɾeassuɾinɡli bɾuʃed mi ʃouldeɾ. "and don't foɾxet
we'ɾe ɡoinɡ up in te idɾoplane tomorow moɾninɡ at nine o'klokk."

ten te but͡ɬeɾ, beʝnd ʝs ʃouldeɾ:

"pʝladelpʝa wants iou on te pone, siɾ."

"aʝ ɾiɡt, in a minute. teʝ tem i'ʝ be ɾiɡt teɾe. . . . ɡood
niɡt."

"ɡood niɡt."

"ɡood niɡt." e smiled--and suddenli teɾe seemed to be a pleasant
siɡnifikanse in abinɡ been amonɡ te last to ɡo, as if e ad desiɾed
it aʝ te time. "ɡood niɡt, old spoɾt. . . . ɡood niɡt."

but as i walked down te steps i saw tat te ebeninɡ was not kite obeɾ.
fifti feet fɾom te dooɾ a dosen eadliɡts iʝuminated a bisare and
tumultwous ssene. in te ditt͡ʃ beside te ɾoad, ɾiɡt side up but
bjolent͡ɬi ʃoɾn of one weel, ɾested a new koupe wʝt͡ʃ ad left ɡatsbi's
dɾibe not two minutes befoɾe. te ʃaɾp xut of a waʝ akkounted foɾ te
detat͡ʃment of te weel wʝt͡ʃ was now xettinɡ konsideɾable attentjon fɾom
alf a dosen kuɾjous t͡ʃauffeuɾs. owebeɾ, as tei ad left teiɾ kaɾs
blokkinɡ te ɾoad a aɾʃ diskoɾdant din fɾom tose in te ɾeaɾ ad been
audible foɾ some time and added to te alɾeadi bjolent konfusjon of
te ssene.

a man in a lonɡ dusteɾ ad dismounted fɾom te wɾekk and now stood in
te middle of te ɾoad, lookinɡ fɾom te kaɾ to te tiɾe and fɾom te
tiɾe to te obseɾbeɾs in a pleasant, pussled wai.

"see!" e eksplained. "it went in te ditt͡ʃ."

te fakt was infiniteli astoniʃinɡ to ʝm--and i ɾekoɡnised fiɾst te
unuswal kaliti of wondeɾ and ten te man--it was te late patɾon of
ɡatsbi's libɾaɾi.

"ow'd it appen?"

e ʃɾuɡxed ʝs ʃouldeɾs.

"i know notʝnɡ watebeɾ about met͡ʃaniks," e said desisibeli.

"but ow did it appen? did iou ɾun into te waʝ?"

"don't ask me," said owl eies, waʃinɡ ʝs ands of te wole matteɾ.
"i know beɾi litt͡ɬe about dɾibinɡ--nekst to notʝnɡ. it appened,
and tat's aʝ i know."

"weʝ, if iou'ɾe a pooɾ dɾibeɾ iou ouɡtn't to tɾi dɾibinɡ at niɡt."

"but i wasn't eben tɾiinɡ," e eksplained indiɡnant͡ɬi, "i wasn't eben
tɾiinɡ."

an awed wʃ feʝ upon te bistandeɾs.

"do iou want to kommit swiside?"

"iou'ɾe lukki it was xust a weel! a bad dɾibeɾ and not eben tɾiinɡ!"

"iou don't undeɾstand," eksplained te kɾiminal. "i wasn't dɾibinɡ. teɾe's
anoteɾ man in te kaɾ."

te ʃokk tat foʝowed tʝs deklaɾatjon found boise in a sustained
"a--!" as te dooɾ of te koupe swunɡ slowli open. te kɾowd--it was
now a kɾowd--stepped bakk inboluntaɾili and wen te dooɾ ad opened wide
teɾe was a ɡost͡ɬi pause. ten, beɾi ɡɾadwaʝi, paɾt bi paɾt, a pale
danɡlinɡ indibidwal stepped out of te wɾekk, pawinɡ tentatibeli at te
ɡɾound wit a laɾxe unseɾtain dansinɡ ʃoe.

blinded bi te ɡlaɾe of te eadliɡts and konfused bi te insessant
ɡɾoaninɡ of te oɾns te appaɾitjon stood swaiinɡ foɾ a moment befoɾe
e peɾseibed te man in te dusteɾ.

"wa's matteɾ?" e inkiɾed kalmli. "did we ɾun outa ɡas?"

"look!"

alf a dosen finxeɾs pointed at te amputated weel--e staɾed
at it foɾ a moment and ten looked upwaɾd as touɡ e suspekted tat
it ad dɾopped fɾom te ski.

"it kame off," some one eksplained.

e nodded.

"at fiɾst i din' notise we'd stopped."

a pause. ten, takinɡ a lonɡ bɾeat and stɾaiɡteninɡ ʝs ʃouldeɾs
e ɾemaɾked in a deteɾmined boise:

"wondeɾ'ff teʝ me weɾe teɾe's a ɡas'line statjon?"

at least a dosen men, some of tem litt͡ɬe betteɾ off tan e was,
eksplained to ʝm tat weel and kaɾ weɾe no lonxeɾ xoined bi ani pisikal
bond.

"bakk out," e suɡxested afteɾ a moment. "put eɾ in ɾebeɾse."

"but te weel's off!"

e esitated.

"no aɾm in tɾiinɡ," e said.

te kateɾwaulinɡ oɾns ad ɾeat͡ʃed a kɾessendo and i tuɾned awai and
kut akɾoss te lawn towaɾd ome. i ɡlansed bakk onse. a wafeɾ of a moon
was ʃininɡ obeɾ ɡatsbi's ouse, makinɡ te niɡt fine as befoɾe and
suɾbibinɡ te lauɡteɾ and te sound of ʝs stiʝ ɡlowinɡ ɡaɾden. a
sudden emptiness seemed to flow now fɾom te windows and te ɡɾeat
dooɾs, endowinɡ wit komplete isolatjon te fiɡwɾe of te ost wo
stood on te poɾt͡ʃ, ʝs and up in a foɾmal xestuɾe of faɾeweʝ.


ɾeadinɡ obeɾ wat i abe wɾitten so faɾ i see i abe xiben te
impɾessjon tat te ebents of tɾee niɡts sebeɾal weeks apaɾt weɾe aʝ
tat absoɾbed me. on te kontɾaɾi tei weɾe meɾeli kaswal ebents in a
kɾowded summeɾ and, until mut͡ʃ lateɾ, tei absoɾbed me infiniteli less
tan mi peɾsonal affaiɾs.

most of te time i woɾked. in te eaɾli moɾninɡ te sun tɾew mi ʃadow
westwaɾd as i wrjed down te wʝte t͡ʃasms of loweɾ new ioɾk to te
pɾobiti tɾust. i knew te oteɾ kleɾks and iounɡ bond-salesmen bi teiɾ
fiɾst names and lunt͡ʃed wit tem in daɾk kɾowded ɾestauɾants on
litt͡ɬe piɡ sausaxes and maʃed potatoes and koffee. i eben ad a ʃoɾt
affaiɾ wit a xiɾl wo libed in xeɾsei siti and woɾked in te
akkountinɡ depaɾtment, but eɾ bɾoteɾ beɡan tɾowinɡ mean looks in mi
diɾektjon so wen ʃe went on eɾ bakatjon in xuli i let it blow
kjet͡ɬi awai.

i took dinneɾ uswaʝi at te iale klub--foɾ some ɾeason it was te
ɡloomjest ebent of mi dai--and ten i went upstaiɾs to te libɾaɾi and
studjed inbestments and sekuɾitjes foɾ a konssientjous ouɾ.
teɾe weɾe xeneɾaʝi a few ɾjoteɾs aɾound but tei nebeɾ kame into te
libɾaɾi so it was a ɡood plase to woɾk. afteɾ tat, if te niɡt was
meʝow i stɾoʝed down madison abenwe past te old murai ʝʝ otel
and obeɾ tʝɾti-tʝɾd stɾeet to te pennsilbanja statjon.

i beɡan to like new ioɾk, te ɾaki, adbentuɾous feel of it at niɡt
and te satisfaktjon tat te konstant flikkeɾ of men and women and
mat͡ʃines xibes to te ɾest͡ɬess eie. i liked to walk up fift abenwe and
pikk out ɾomantik women fɾom te kɾowd and imaxine tat in a few
minutes i was ɡoinɡ to enteɾ into teiɾ libes, and no one would ebeɾ
know oɾ disappɾobe. sometimes, in mi mind, i foʝowed tem to teiɾ
apaɾtments on te koɾneɾs of ʝdden stɾeets, and tei tuɾned and smiled
bakk at me befoɾe tei faded tɾouɡ a dooɾ into waɾm daɾkness. at te
ent͡ʃanted metɾopolitan twiliɡt i felt a auntinɡ loneliness sometimes,
and felt it in oteɾs--pooɾ iounɡ kleɾks wo loiteɾed in fɾont of windows
waitinɡ until it was time foɾ a solitaɾi ɾestauɾant dinneɾ--iounɡ kleɾks
in te dusk, wastinɡ te most poiɡnant moments of niɡt and life.

aɡain at eiɡt o'klokk, wen te daɾk lanes of te foɾtjes weɾe fibe
deep wit tɾobbinɡ taksi kabs, bound foɾ te teatɾe distɾikt, i felt a
sinkinɡ in mi eaɾt. foɾms leaned toxeteɾ in te taksis as tei waited,
and boises sanɡ, and teɾe was lauɡteɾ fɾom uneaɾd xokes, and liɡted
siɡaɾettes out͡ɬined uninteʝixible xestuɾes inside. imaxininɡ tat
i, too, was wriinɡ towaɾd ɡaieti and ʃaɾinɡ teiɾ intimate
ekssitement, i wiʃed tem weʝ.

foɾ a wʝle i lost siɡt of xoɾdan bakeɾ, and ten in midsummeɾ i found
eɾ aɡain. at fiɾst i was flatteɾed to ɡo plases wit eɾ bekause ʃe
was a ɡolf t͡ʃampjon and ebeɾi one knew eɾ name. ten it was
sometʝnɡ moɾe. i wasn't aktwaʝi in lobe, but i felt a soɾt of
tendeɾ kuɾjositi. te boɾed auɡti fase tat ʃe tuɾned to te
woɾld konsealed sometʝnɡ--most affektatjons konseal sometʝnɡ
ebentwaʝi, eben touɡ tei don't in te bexinninɡ--and one dai i found
wat it was. wen we weɾe on a ouse-paɾti toxeteɾ up in waɾwikk, ʃe
left a borowed kaɾ out in te ɾain wit te top down, and ten ljed
about it--and suddenli i ɾemembeɾed te stoɾi about eɾ tat ad eluded
me tat niɡt at daisi's. at eɾ fiɾst biɡ ɡolf touɾnament teɾe was a
ɾow tat neaɾli ɾeat͡ʃed te newspapeɾs--a suɡxestjon tat ʃe ad mobed
eɾ baʝ fɾom a bad lje in te semi-final ɾound. te tʝnɡ appɾoat͡ʃed
te pɾopoɾtjons of a skandal--ten djed awai. a kaddi ɾetɾakted ʝs
statement and te onli oteɾ witness admitted tat e miɡt abe been
mistaken. te insident and te name ad ɾemained toxeteɾ in mi mind.

xoɾdan bakeɾ instinktibeli aboided klebeɾ, ʃɾewd men, and now i saw
tat tʝs was bekause ʃe felt safeɾ on a plane weɾe ani dibeɾxense
fɾom a kode would be touɡt impossible. ʃe was inkuɾabli diʃonest.
ʃe wasn't able to enduɾe beinɡ at a disadbantaxe, and xiben tʝs
unwiʝinɡness, i suppose ʃe ad beɡwn dealinɡ in subteɾfuxes wen ʃe
was beɾi iounɡ in oɾdeɾ to keep tat kool, insolent smile tuɾned to te
woɾld and iet satisfi te demands of eɾ aɾd xaunti bodi.

it made no diffeɾense to me. diʃonesti in a woman is a tʝnɡ iou nebeɾ
blame deepli--i was kaswaʝi sori, and ten i foɾɡot. it was on tat
same ouse paɾti tat we ad a kuɾjous konbeɾsatjon about dɾibinɡ a
kaɾ. it staɾted bekause ʃe passed so klose to some woɾkmen tat ouɾ
fendeɾ flikked a button on one man's koat.

"iou'ɾe a ɾotten dɾibeɾ," i pɾotested. "eiteɾ iou ouɡt to be moɾe
kaɾeful oɾ iou ouɡtn't to dɾibe at aʝ."

"i am kaɾeful."

"no, iou'ɾe not."

"weʝ, oteɾ people aɾe," ʃe said liɡt͡ɬi.

"wat's tat ɡot to do wit it?"

"tei'ʝ keep out of mi wai," ʃe insisted. "it takes two to make an
aksident."

"suppose iou met somebodi xust as kaɾeless as iouɾself."

"i ope i nebeɾ wiʝ," ʃe answeɾed. "i ate kaɾeless people. tat's wi
i like iou."

eɾ ɡɾei, sun-stɾained eies staɾed stɾaiɡt aead, but ʃe ad
delibeɾateli ʃifted ouɾ ɾelatjons, and foɾ a moment i touɡt i lobed
eɾ. but i am slow-tʝnkinɡ and fuʝ of inteɾjoɾ ɾules tat akt as bɾakes
on mi desiɾes, and i knew tat fiɾst i ad to xet miself definiteli out of
tat tanɡle bakk ome. i'd been wɾitinɡ letteɾs onse a week and siɡninɡ
tem: "lobe, nikk," and aʝ i kould tʝnk of was ow, wen tat seɾtain
xiɾl plaied tennis, a faint mustat͡ʃe of peɾspiɾatjon appeaɾed on eɾ
uppeɾ lip. nebeɾteless teɾe was a baɡe undeɾstandinɡ tat ad to be
taktfuʝi bɾoken off befoɾe i was fɾee.

ebeɾi one suspekts ʝmself of at least one of te kaɾdinal biɾtwes, and
tʝs is mine: i am one of te few onest people tat i abe ebeɾ known.




t͡ʃapteɾ 4



on sundai moɾninɡ wʝle t͡ʃuɾt͡ʃ beʝs ɾanɡ in te biʝaxes alonɡ ʃoɾe
te woɾld and its mistɾess ɾetuɾned to ɡatsbi's ouse and twinkled
ʝlaɾjousli on ʝs lawn.

"e's a boot͡ɬeɡxeɾ," said te iounɡ ladjes, mobinɡ someweɾe between
ʝs kokktails and ʝs floweɾs. "one time e kiʝed a man wo ad found out
tat e was nepew to bon ʝndenbuɾɡ and sekond kousin to te debil.
ɾeat͡ʃ me a ɾose, onei, and pouɾ me a last dɾop into tat teɾe kɾistal
ɡlass."

onse i wɾote down on te empti spases of a time-table te names
of tose wo kame to ɡatsbi's ouse tat summeɾ. it is an old time-table
now, disinteɡɾatinɡ at its folds and eaded "tʝs st͡ʃedule in effekt
xuli 5t, 1922." but i kan stiʝ ɾead te ɡɾei names and tei wiʝ xibe
iou a betteɾ impɾessjon tan mi xeneɾalitjes of tose wo aksepted
ɡatsbi's ospitaliti and paid ʝm te subt͡ɬe tɾibute of knowinɡ notʝnɡ
watebeɾ about ʝm.

fɾom east eɡɡ, ten, kame te t͡ʃesteɾ bekkeɾs and te leet͡ʃes and a
man named bunsen wom i knew at iale and doktoɾ websteɾ sibet wo
was dɾowned last summeɾ up in maine. and te oɾnbeams and te wiʝje
boltaiɾes and a wole klan named blakkbukk wo alwais ɡateɾed in a
koɾneɾ and flipped up teiɾ noses like ɡoats at wosoebeɾ kame neaɾ.
and te ismais and te t͡ʃɾistjes (oɾ ɾateɾ wbeɾt aweɾbat͡ʃ and mɾ.
t͡ʃɾistje's wife) and edɡaɾ beabeɾ, wose aiɾ tei sai tuɾned
kotton-wʝte one winteɾ afteɾnoon foɾ no ɡood ɾeason at aʝ.

klaɾense endibe was fɾom east eɡɡ, as i ɾemembeɾ. e kame onli
onse, in wʝte knikkeɾbokkeɾs, and ad a fiɡt wit a bum named
etti in te ɡaɾden. fɾom faɾteɾ out on te island kame te t͡ʃeadles
and te o. ɾ. p. st͡ʃɾaedeɾs and te stonewaʝ xakkson abɾams of
xeoɾxia and te fiʃɡwaɾds and te ɾiplei sneʝs. sneʝ was teɾe
tɾee dais befoɾe e went to te penitentjaɾi, so dɾunk out on te
ɡɾabel dɾibe tat mɾs. ulisses swett's automobile ɾan obeɾ ʝs ɾiɡt
and. te dansies kame too and s. b. wʝtebait, wo was weʝ obeɾ
siksti, and mauɾise a. flink and te ammeɾeads and beluɡa te
tobakko impoɾteɾ and beluɡa's xiɾls.

fɾom west eɡɡ kame te poles and te mulɾeadis and sesil ɾoebukk and
sesil st͡ʃoen and ɡwlikk te state senatoɾ and newton oɾt͡ʃid wo
kontɾoʝed films paɾ eksseʝense and ekkaust and klide koen and don
s. st͡ʃwaɾt͡se (te son) and aɾtwɾ mkkaɾti, aʝ konnekted wit te
mobjes in one wai oɾ anoteɾ. and te kat͡ɬips and te bembeɾɡs and ɡ.
eaɾl muldoon, bɾoteɾ to tat muldoon wo afteɾwaɾd stɾanɡled ʝs wife.
da fontano te pɾomoteɾ kame teɾe, and ed leɡɾos and xames b.
("ɾot-ɡwt") feret and te de xonɡs and eɾnest liʝi--tei kame to
ɡamble and wen feret wandeɾed into te ɡaɾden it meant e was
kleaned out and assosiated tɾaktjon would abe to fluktwate pɾofitabli
nekst dai.

a man named klipspɾinxeɾ was teɾe so often and so lonɡ tat e bekame
known as "te boaɾdeɾ"--i doubt if e ad ani oteɾ ome. of teatɾikal
people teɾe weɾe ɡws waise and oɾase o'donaban and lesteɾ meieɾ and
xeoɾxe dukkweed and fɾansis buʝ. also fɾom new ioɾk weɾe te t͡ʃɾomes
and te bakkissons and te dennikkeɾs and ɾussel betti and te
koriɡans and te keʝeeɾs and te dewaɾs and te skuʝis and s. w.
belt͡ʃeɾ and te smiɾkes and te iounɡ kinns, diboɾsed now, and enɾi
l. palmetto wo kiʝed ʝmself bi xumpinɡ in fɾont of a subwai tɾain
in times skaɾe.

benni mkklenaan aribed alwais wit fouɾ xiɾls. tei weɾe nebeɾ kite
te same ones in pisikal peɾson but tei weɾe so identikal one wit
anoteɾ tat it inebitabli seemed tei ad been teɾe befoɾe. i abe
foɾɡotten teiɾ names--xakeline, i tʝnk, oɾ else konswela oɾ ɡloɾja
oɾ xudi oɾ xune, and teiɾ last names weɾe eiteɾ te melodjous names
of floweɾs and monts oɾ te steɾneɾ ones of te ɡɾeat ameɾikan
kapitalists wose kousins, if pɾessed, tei would konfess temselbes to
be.

in additjon to aʝ tese i kan ɾemembeɾ tat faustina o'bɾjen kame
teɾe at least onse and te baedekeɾ xiɾls and iounɡ bɾeweɾ wo ad
ʝs nose ʃot off in te waɾ and mɾ. albɾukksbuɾxeɾ and miss aaɡ, ʝs
fjansee, and aɾdita fit͡s-peteɾs, and mɾ. p. xewett, onse ead of te
ameɾikan lexion, and miss klaudja ʝp wit a man ɾeputed to be eɾ
t͡ʃauffeuɾ, and a pɾinse of sometʝnɡ wom we kaʝed duke and wose name,
if i ebeɾ knew it, i abe foɾɡotten.

aʝ tese people kame to ɡatsbi's ouse in te summeɾ.


at nine o'klokk, one moɾninɡ late in xuli ɡatsbi's ɡoɾxeous kaɾ
luɾt͡ʃed up te ɾokki dɾibe to mi dooɾ and ɡabe out a buɾst of melodi
fɾom its tɾee noted oɾn. it was te fiɾst time e ad kaʝed on me
touɡ i ad ɡone to two of ʝs paɾtjes, mounted in ʝs idɾoplane,
and, at ʝs uɾxent inbitatjon, made fɾekent use of ʝs beat͡ʃ.

"ɡood moɾninɡ, old spoɾt. iou'ɾe abinɡ lunt͡ʃ wit me todai and i
touɡt we'd ɾide up toxeteɾ."

e was balansinɡ ʝmself on te daʃboaɾd of ʝs kaɾ wit tat
ɾesouɾsefulness of mobement tat is so pekuljaɾli ameɾikan--tat komes,
i suppose, wit te absense of liftinɡ woɾk oɾ ɾixid sittinɡ in iout
and, eben moɾe, wit te foɾmless ɡɾase of ouɾ neɾbous, spoɾadik ɡames.
tʝs kaliti was kontinwaʝi bɾeakinɡ tɾouɡ ʝs punktiljous manneɾ in
te ʃape of ɾest͡ɬessness. e was nebeɾ kite stiʝ; teɾe was alwais a
tappinɡ foot someweɾe oɾ te impatjent openinɡ and klosinɡ of a and.

e saw me lookinɡ wit admiɾatjon at ʝs kaɾ.

"it's pɾetti, isn't it, old spoɾt." e xumped off to xibe me a betteɾ
bjew. "aben't iou ebeɾ seen it befoɾe?"

i'd seen it. ebeɾibodi ad seen it. it was a ɾit͡ʃ kɾeam koloɾ, bɾiɡt
wit nikkel, swoʝen eɾe and teɾe in its monstɾous lenɡt wit
tɾjumpant atbokses and suppeɾ-bokses and tool-bokses, and terased wit a
labiɾint of windʃjelds tat miroɾed a dosen suns. sittinɡ down beʝnd
mani laieɾs of ɡlass in a soɾt of ɡɾeen leateɾ konseɾbatoɾi we staɾted
to town.

i ad talked wit ʝm peɾaps alf a dosen times in te past mont and
found, to mi disappointment, tat e ad litt͡ɬe to sai. so mi fiɾst
impɾessjon, tat e was a peɾson of some undefined konsekense, ad
ɡɾadwaʝi faded and e ad bekome simpli te pɾopɾjetoɾ of an elaboɾate
ɾoadouse nekst dooɾ.

and ten kame tat diskonseɾtinɡ ɾide. we adn't ɾeat͡ʃed west eɡɡ
biʝaxe befoɾe ɡatsbi beɡan leabinɡ ʝs eleɡant sentenses unfiniʃed
and slappinɡ ʝmself indesisibeli on te knee of ʝs kaɾamel-koloɾed
swit.

"look eɾe, old spoɾt," e bɾoke out suɾpɾisinɡli. "wat's iouɾ opinjon
of me, aniow?"

a litt͡ɬe obeɾwelmed, i beɡan te xeneɾalised ebasjons wʝt͡ʃ
tat kestjon deseɾbes.

"weʝ, i'm ɡoinɡ to teʝ iou sometʝnɡ about mi life," e interupted.
"i don't want iou to xet a wɾonɡ idea of me fɾom aʝ tese stoɾjes iou
eaɾ."

so e was awaɾe of te bisare akkusatjons tat flaboɾed konbeɾsatjon in
ʝs aʝs.

"i'ʝ teʝ iou ɡod's tɾut." ʝs ɾiɡt and suddenli oɾdeɾed dibine
ɾetɾibutjon to stand bi. "i am te son of some wealti people in te
middle-west--aʝ dead now. i was bɾouɡt up in ameɾika but edukated at
oksfoɾd bekause aʝ mi ansestoɾs abe been edukated teɾe foɾ mani ieaɾs.
it is a famili tɾaditjon."

e looked at me sidewais--and i knew wi xoɾdan bakeɾ ad beljebed e was
liinɡ. e wrjed te pɾase "edukated at oksfoɾd," oɾ swaʝowed it oɾ
t͡ʃoked on it as touɡ it ad boteɾed ʝm befoɾe. and wit tʝs doubt
ʝs wole statement feʝ to pjeses and i wondeɾed if teɾe wasn't
sometʝnɡ a litt͡ɬe sinisteɾ about ʝm afteɾ aʝ.

"wat paɾt of te middle-west?" i inkiɾed kaswaʝi.

"san fɾansisko."

"i see."

"mi famili aʝ djed and i kame into a ɡood deal of monei."

ʝs boise was solemn as if te memoɾi of tat sudden ekstinktjon of a klan
stiʝ aunted ʝm. foɾ a moment i suspekted tat e was puʝinɡ mi leɡ
but a ɡlanse at ʝm konbinsed me oteɾwise.

"afteɾ tat i libed like a iounɡ ɾaxa in aʝ te kapitals of
euɾope--paɾis, benise, ɾome--koʝektinɡ xewels, t͡ʃjefli ɾubjes, wntinɡ
biɡ ɡame, paintinɡ a litt͡ɬe, tʝnɡs foɾ miself onli, and tɾiinɡ to
foɾxet sometʝnɡ beɾi sad tat ad appened to me lonɡ aɡo."

wit an effoɾt i manaxed to ɾestɾain mi inkɾedulous lauɡteɾ. te beɾi
pɾases weɾe woɾn so tɾeadbaɾe tat tei eboked no imaxe ekssept tat of a
tuɾbaned "t͡ʃaɾakteɾ" leakinɡ sawdust at ebeɾi poɾe as e puɾswed a
tixeɾ tɾouɡ te bois de bouloɡne.

"ten kame te waɾ, old spoɾt. it was a ɡɾeat ɾeljef and i tɾjed beɾi
aɾd to dje but i seemed to beaɾ an ent͡ʃanted life. i aksepted a
kommissjon as fiɾst ljeutenant wen it beɡan. in te aɾɡonne foɾest i
took two mat͡ʃine-ɡwn detat͡ʃments so faɾ foɾwaɾd tat teɾe was a alf
mile ɡap on eiteɾ side of us weɾe te infantɾi kouldn't adbanse. we
staied teɾe two dais and two niɡts, a wndɾed and tʝɾti men wit
siksteen lewis ɡwns, and wen te infantɾi kame up at last tei found
te insiɡnja of tɾee xeɾman dibisjons amonɡ te piles of dead. i was
pɾomoted to be a maxoɾ and ebeɾi aʝjed ɡobeɾnment ɡabe me a
dekoɾatjon--eben monteneɡɾo, litt͡ɬe monteneɡɾo down on te adɾjatik
sea!"

litt͡ɬe monteneɡɾo! e lifted up te woɾds and nodded at tem--wit
ʝs smile. te smile kompɾeended monteneɡɾo's tɾoubled ʝstoɾi and
simpatʝsed wit te bɾabe stɾuɡɡles of te monteneɡɾin people. it
appɾesiated fuʝi te t͡ʃain of natjonal siɾkumstanses wʝt͡ʃ ad
elisited tʝs tɾibute fɾom monteneɡɾo's waɾm litt͡ɬe eaɾt. mi
inkɾeduliti was submeɾxed in fassinatjon now; it was like skimminɡ
astili tɾouɡ a dosen maɡasines.

e ɾeat͡ʃed in ʝs pokket and a pjese of metal, slunɡ on a ɾibbon, feʝ
into mi palm.

"tat's te one fɾom monteneɡɾo."

to mi astoniʃment, te tʝnɡ ad an autentik look.

_oɾdeɾi di danilo_, ɾan te siɾkulaɾ lexend, _monteneɡɾo, nikolas ɾeks_.

"tuɾn it."

_maxoɾ xai ɡatsbi_, i ɾead, _foɾ balouɾ ekstɾaoɾdinaɾi_.

"eɾe's anoteɾ tʝnɡ i alwais kari. a soubeniɾ of oksfoɾd dais. it was
taken in tɾiniti kad--te man on mi left is now te eaɾl of doɾkasteɾ."

it was a potoɡɾap of alf a dosen iounɡ men in blaseɾs loafinɡ in an
aɾt͡ʃwai tɾouɡ wʝt͡ʃ weɾe bisible a ost of spiɾes. teɾe was ɡatsbi,
lookinɡ a litt͡ɬe, not mut͡ʃ, iounxeɾ--wit a kɾikket bat in ʝs and.

ten it was aʝ tɾwe. i saw te skins of tixeɾs flaminɡ in ʝs palase
on te ɡɾand kanal; i saw ʝm openinɡ a t͡ʃest of ɾubjes to ease, wit
teiɾ kɾimson-liɡted depts, te ɡnawinɡs of ʝs bɾoken eaɾt.

"i'm ɡoinɡ to make a biɡ ɾekest of iou todai," e said, pokketinɡ ʝs
soubeniɾs wit satisfaktjon, "so i touɡt iou ouɡt to know sometʝnɡ
about me. i didn't want iou to tʝnk i was xust some nobodi. iou see,
i uswaʝi find miself amonɡ stɾanxeɾs bekause i dɾift eɾe and teɾe
tɾiinɡ to foɾxet te sad tʝnɡ tat appened to me." e esitated.
"iou'ʝ eaɾ about it tʝs afteɾnoon."

"at lunt͡ʃ?"

"no, tʝs afteɾnoon. i appened to find out tat iou'ɾe takinɡ miss bakeɾ
to tea."

"do iou mean iou'ɾe in lobe wit miss bakeɾ?"

"no, old spoɾt, i'm not. but miss bakeɾ as kindli konsented to speak
to iou about tʝs matteɾ."

i adn't te faintest idea wat "tʝs matteɾ" was, but i was moɾe
annoied tan inteɾested. i adn't asked xoɾdan to tea in oɾdeɾ to diskuss
mɾ. xai ɡatsbi. i was suɾe te ɾekest would be sometʝnɡ utteɾli
fantastik and foɾ a moment i was sori i'd ebeɾ set foot upon ʝs
obeɾpopulated lawn.

e wouldn't sai anoteɾ woɾd. ʝs korektness ɡɾew on ʝm as we neaɾed
te siti. we passed poɾt ɾoosebelt, weɾe teɾe was a ɡlimpse of
ɾed-belted osean-ɡoinɡ ʃips, and sped alonɡ a kobbled slum lined wit
te daɾk, undeseɾted saloons of te faded xilt nineteen-wndɾeds. ten
te baʝei of aʃes opened out on bot sides of us, and i ad a ɡlimpse
of mɾs. wilson stɾaininɡ at te ɡaɾaxe pump wit pantinɡ bitaliti as we
went bi.

wit fendeɾs spɾead like winɡs we skatteɾed liɡt tɾouɡ alf
astoɾja--onli alf, foɾ as we twisted amonɡ te piʝaɾs of te
elebated i eaɾd te familjaɾ "xuɡ--xuɡ--spat!" of a motoɾ kikle, and a
fɾantik poliseman ɾode alonɡside.

"aʝ ɾiɡt, old spoɾt," kaʝed ɡatsbi. we slowed down. takinɡ a wʝte
kaɾd fɾom ʝs waʝet e wabed it befoɾe te man's eies.

"ɾiɡt iou aɾe," aɡɾeed te poliseman, tippinɡ ʝs kap. "know iou nekst
time, mɾ. ɡatsbi. ekskuse me!"

"wat was tat?" i inkiɾed.  "te piktuɾe of oksfoɾd?"

"i was able to do te kommissjoneɾ a faboɾ onse, and e sends me a
t͡ʃɾistmas kaɾd ebeɾi ieaɾ."

obeɾ te ɡɾeat bɾidxe, wit te sunliɡt tɾouɡ te xiɾdeɾs makinɡ a
konstant flikkeɾ upon te mobinɡ kaɾs, wit te siti ɾisinɡ up akɾoss te
ɾibeɾ in wʝte eaps and suɡaɾ lumps aʝ bwilt wit a wiʃ out of
non-olfaktoɾi monei. te siti seen fɾom te keensboɾo bɾidxe is alwais
te siti seen foɾ te fiɾst time, in its fiɾst wild pɾomise of aʝ te
misteɾi and te beauti in te woɾld.

a dead man passed us in a eaɾse eaped wit blooms, foʝowed bi two
karjaxes wit dɾawn blinds and bi moɾe t͡ʃeeɾful karjaxes foɾ
fɾjends. te fɾjends looked out at us wit te tɾaxik eies and ʃoɾt
uppeɾ lips of sout-easteɾn euɾope, and i was ɡlad tat te siɡt of
ɡatsbi's splendid kaɾ was inkluded in teiɾ sombeɾ olidai. as we
kɾossed blakkweʝ's island a limousine passed us, dɾiben bi a wʝte
t͡ʃauffeuɾ, in wʝt͡ʃ sat tɾee modiʃ neɡɾoes, two bukks and a xiɾl. i
lauɡed aloud as te iolks of teiɾ eiebaʝs ɾoʝed towaɾd us in
auɡti ɾibalɾi.

"anitʝnɡ kan appen now tat we'be slid obeɾ tʝs bɾidxe," i touɡt;
"anitʝnɡ at aʝ. . . ."

eben ɡatsbi kould appen, witout ani paɾtikulaɾ wondeɾ.


ɾoaɾinɡ noon. in a weʝ-fanned foɾti-sekond stɾeet seʝaɾ i met ɡatsbi
foɾ lunt͡ʃ. blinkinɡ awai te bɾiɡtness of te stɾeet outside mi eies
pikked ʝm out obskuɾeli in te anteɾoom, talkinɡ to anoteɾ man.

"mɾ. karawai tʝs is mi fɾjend mɾ. wolfʃjem."

a smaʝ, flat-nosed xew ɾaised ʝs laɾxe ead and ɾeɡaɾded me wit two
fine ɡɾowts of aiɾ wʝt͡ʃ luksuɾjated in eiteɾ nostɾil. afteɾ a moment i
diskobeɾed ʝs tini eies in te alf daɾkness.

"--so i took one look at ʝm--" said mɾ. wolfʃjem, ʃakinɡ mi and
eaɾnest͡ɬi, "--and wat do iou tʝnk i did?"

"wat?" i inkiɾed politeli.

but ebident͡ɬi e was not addɾessinɡ me foɾ e dɾopped mi and and
kobeɾed ɡatsbi wit ʝs ekspɾessibe nose.

"i anded te monei to katspauɡ and i sid, 'aʝ ɾiɡt, katspauɡ,
don't pai ʝm a penni tiʝ e ʃuts ʝs mout.' e ʃut it ten and
teɾe."

ɡatsbi took an aɾm of eat͡ʃ of us and mobed foɾwaɾd into te
ɾestauɾant weɾeupon mɾ. wolfʃjem swaʝowed a new sentense e was
staɾtinɡ and lapsed into a somnambulatoɾi abstɾaktjon.

"ʝɡbaʝs?" asked te ead waiteɾ.

"tʝs is a nise ɾestauɾant eɾe," said mɾ. wolfʃjem lookinɡ at te
pɾesbiteɾjan nimps on te seilinɡ. "but i like akɾoss te stɾeet betteɾ!"

"ies, ʝɡbaʝs," aɡɾeed ɡatsbi, and ten to mɾ. wolfʃjem: "it's too ot
obeɾ teɾe."

"ot and smaʝ--ies," said mɾ. wolfʃjem, "but fuʝ of memoɾjes."

"wat plase is tat?" i asked.

"te old metɾopole.

"te old metɾopole," bɾooded mɾ. wolfʃjem ɡloomili. "fiʝed wit fases
dead and ɡone. fiʝed wit fɾjends ɡone now foɾebeɾ. i kan't foɾxet so
lonɡ as i libe te niɡt tei ʃot ɾosi ɾosental teɾe. it was siks of us
at te table and ɾosi ad eat and dɾunk a lot aʝ ebeninɡ. wen it was
almost moɾninɡ te waiteɾ kame up to ʝm wit a funni look and sais
somebodi wants to speak to ʝm outside. 'aʝ ɾiɡt,' sais ɾosi and bexins
to xet up and i puʝed ʝm down in ʝs t͡ʃaiɾ.

" 'let te bastaɾds kome in eɾe if tei want iou, ɾosi, but don't iou,
so elp me, mobe outside tʝs ɾoom.'

"it was fouɾ o'klokk in te moɾninɡ ten, and if we'd of ɾaised te blinds
we'd of seen dailiɡt."

"did e ɡo?" i asked innosent͡ɬi.

"suɾe e went,"--mɾ. wolfʃjem's nose flaʃed at me indiɡnant͡ɬi--"e
tuɾned aɾound in te dooɾ and sais, 'don't let tat waiteɾ take awai
mi koffee!' ten e went out on te sidewalk and tei ʃot ʝm
tɾee times in ʝs fuʝ beʝi and dɾobe awai."

"fouɾ of tem weɾe elektɾokuted," i said, ɾemembeɾinɡ.

"fibe wit bekkeɾ." ʝs nostɾils tuɾned to me in an inteɾested wai.
"i undeɾstand iou'ɾe lookinɡ foɾ a business ɡonneɡtjon."

te xukstapositjon of tese two ɾemaɾks was staɾt͡ɬinɡ. ɡatsbi answeɾed
foɾ me:

"o, no," e eksklaimed, "tʝs isn't te man!"

"no?" mɾ. wolfʃjem seemed disappointed.

"tʝs is xust a fɾjend. i told iou we'd talk about tat some oteɾ
time."

"i beɡ iouɾ paɾdon," said mɾ. wolfʃjem, "i ad a wɾonɡ man."

a sukkulent aʃ aribed, and mɾ. wolfʃjem, foɾxettinɡ te moɾe
sentimental atmospeɾe of te old metɾopole, beɡan to eat wit
feɾosious delikaki. ʝs eies, meanwʝle, ɾobed beɾi slowli aʝ aɾound te
ɾoom--e kompleted te aɾk bi tuɾninɡ to inspekt te people diɾekt͡ɬi
beʝnd. i tʝnk tat, ekssept foɾ mi pɾesense, e would abe taken one
ʃoɾt ɡlanse beneat ouɾ own table.

"look eɾe, old spoɾt," said ɡatsbi, leaninɡ towaɾd me, "i'm afɾaid i
made iou a litt͡ɬe anɡɾi tʝs moɾninɡ in te kaɾ."

teɾe was te smile aɡain, but tʝs time i eld out aɡainst it.

"i don't like misteɾjes," i answeɾed. "and i don't undeɾstand wi iou
won't kome out fɾankli and teʝ me wat iou want. wi as it aʝ ɡot to
kome tɾouɡ miss bakeɾ?"

"o, it's notʝnɡ undeɾand," e assuɾed me. "miss bakeɾ's a ɡɾeat
spoɾtswoman, iou know, and ʃe'd nebeɾ do anitʝnɡ tat wasn't aʝ ɾiɡt."

suddenli e looked at ʝs watt͡ʃ, xumped up and wrjed fɾom te ɾoom
leabinɡ me wit mɾ. wolfʃjem at te table.

"e as to telepone," said mɾ. wolfʃjem, foʝowinɡ ʝm wit ʝs eies.
"fine feʝow, isn't e? andsome to look at and a peɾfekt xent͡ɬeman."

"ies."

"e's an oɡɡsfoɾd man."

"o!"

"e went to oɡɡsfoɾd koʝexe in enɡland. iou know oɡɡsfoɾd koʝexe?"

"i'be eaɾd of it."

"it's one of te most famous koʝexes in te woɾld."

"abe iou known ɡatsbi foɾ a lonɡ time?" i inkiɾed.

"sebeɾal ieaɾs," e answeɾed in a ɡɾatifjed wai. "i made te pleasuɾe of
ʝs akkaintanse xust afteɾ te waɾ. but i knew i ad diskobeɾed a man of
fine bɾeedinɡ afteɾ i talked wit ʝm an ouɾ. i said to miself: 'teɾe's
te kind of man iou'd like to take ome and intɾoduse to iouɾ moteɾ and
sisteɾ.' " e paused. "i see iou'ɾe lookinɡ at mi kuff buttons."

i adn't been lookinɡ at tem, but i did now.  tei weɾe komposed of
oddli familjaɾ pjeses of iboɾi.

"finest spesimens of wman molaɾs," e infoɾmed me.

"weʝ!" i inspekted tem. "tat's a beɾi inteɾestinɡ idea."

"iea." e flipped ʝs sleebes up undeɾ ʝs koat. "iea, ɡatsbi's beɾi
kaɾeful about women. e would nebeɾ so mut͡ʃ as look at a fɾjend's wife."

wen te subxekt of tʝs instinktibe tɾust ɾetuɾned to te table and sat
down mɾ. wolfʃjem dɾank ʝs koffee wit a xeɾk and ɡot to ʝs feet.

"i abe enxoied mi lunt͡ʃ," e said, "and i'm ɡoinɡ to ɾun off fɾom iou
two iounɡ men befoɾe i outstai mi welkome."

"don't wri, meieɾ," said ɡatsbi, witout entwsjasm. mɾ. wolfʃjem
ɾaised ʝs and in a soɾt of benediktjon.

"iou'ɾe beɾi polite but i belonɡ to anoteɾ xeneɾatjon," e announsed
solemnli. "iou sit eɾe and diskuss iouɾ spoɾts and iouɾ iounɡ ladjes and
iouɾ----" e suppljed an imaxinaɾi noun wit anoteɾ wabe of ʝs
and--"as foɾ me, i am fifti ieaɾs old, and i won't impose miself
on iou ani lonxeɾ."

as e ʃook ands and tuɾned awai ʝs tɾaxik nose was tɾemblinɡ.
i wondeɾed if i ad said anitʝnɡ to offend ʝm.

"e bekomes beɾi sentimental sometimes," eksplained ɡatsbi. "tʝs is one of
ʝs sentimental dais. e's kite a t͡ʃaɾakteɾ aɾound new ioɾk--a denisen of
bɾoadwai."

"wo is e aniow--an aktoɾ?"

"no."

"a dentist?"

"meieɾ wolfʃjem? no, e's a ɡambleɾ." ɡatsbi esitated, ten added
kooʝi: "e's te man wo fiksed te woɾld's seɾjes bakk in 1919."

"fiksed te woɾld's seɾjes?" i ɾepeated.

te idea staɡxeɾed me. i ɾemembeɾed of kouɾse tat te woɾld's seɾjes
ad been fiksed in 1919 but if i ad touɡt of it at aʝ i would abe
touɡt of it as a tʝnɡ tat meɾeli appened, te end of some
inebitable t͡ʃain. it nebeɾ okkured to me tat one man kould staɾt to
plai wit te fait of fifti miʝjon people--wit te sinɡle-mindedness
of a buɾɡlaɾ blowinɡ a safe.

"ow did e appen to do tat?" i asked afteɾ a minute.

"e xust saw te oppoɾtuniti."

"wi isn't e in xail?"

"tei kan't xet ʝm, old spoɾt. e's a smaɾt man."

i insisted on paiinɡ te t͡ʃekk. as te waiteɾ bɾouɡt mi t͡ʃanxe i kauɡt
siɡt of tom but͡ʃanan akɾoss te kɾowded ɾoom.

"kome alonɡ wit me foɾ a minute," i said. "i'be ɡot to sai eʝo
to someone."

wen e saw us tom xumped up and took alf a dosen steps in ouɾ
diɾektjon.

"weɾe'be iou been?" e demanded eaxeɾli. "daisi's fuɾjous bekause iou
aben't kaʝed up."

"tʝs is mɾ. ɡatsbi, mɾ. but͡ʃanan."

tei ʃook ands bɾjefli and a stɾained, unfamiljaɾ look of embarassment
kame obeɾ ɡatsbi's fase.

"ow'be iou been, aniow?" demanded tom of me. "ow'd iou appen to kome
up tʝs faɾ to eat?"

"i'be been abinɡ lunt͡ʃ wit mɾ. ɡatsbi."

i tuɾned towaɾd mɾ. ɡatsbi, but e was no lonxeɾ teɾe.


one oktobeɾ dai in nineteen-sebenteen----
(said xoɾdan bakeɾ tat afteɾnoon, sittinɡ up beɾi stɾaiɡt on a stɾaiɡt
t͡ʃaiɾ in te tea-ɡaɾden at te plasa otel)
--i was walkinɡ alonɡ fɾom one plase to anoteɾ alf on te sidewalks and
alf on te lawns. i was appjeɾ on te lawns bekause i ad on ʃoes fɾom
enɡland wit ɾubbeɾ nobs on te soles tat bit into te soft ɡɾound.
i ad on a new plaid skiɾt also tat blew a litt͡ɬe in te wind and
wenebeɾ tʝs appened te ɾed, wʝte and blwe banneɾs in fɾont of aʝ
te ouses stɾett͡ʃed out stiff and said tut-tut-tut-tut in a disappɾobinɡ
wai.

te laɾxest of te banneɾs and te laɾxest of te lawns belonxed to
daisi fai's ouse. ʃe was xust eiɡteen, two ieaɾs oldeɾ tan me, and
bi faɾ te most populaɾ of aʝ te iounɡ xiɾls in lowisbiʝe. ʃe
dɾessed in wʝte, and ad a litt͡ɬe wʝte ɾoadsteɾ and aʝ dai lonɡ
te telepone ɾanɡ in eɾ ouse and ekssited iounɡ offiseɾs fɾom kamp
tailoɾ demanded te pɾibilexe of monopolisinɡ eɾ tat niɡt, "aniwais,
foɾ an ouɾ!"

wen i kame opposite eɾ ouse tat moɾninɡ eɾ wʝte ɾoadsteɾ was beside
te kuɾb, and ʃe was sittinɡ in it wit a ljeutenant i ad nebeɾ seen
befoɾe. tei weɾe so enɡɾossed in eat͡ʃ oteɾ tat ʃe didn't see me until
i was fibe feet awai.

"eʝo xoɾdan," ʃe kaʝed unekspektedli. "please kome eɾe."

i was flatteɾed tat ʃe wanted to speak to me, bekause of aʝ te oldeɾ
xiɾls i admiɾed eɾ most. ʃe asked me if i was ɡoinɡ to te ɾed kɾoss and
make bandaxes. i was. weʝ, ten, would i teʝ tem tat ʃe kouldn't kome
tat dai? te offiseɾ looked at daisi wʝle ʃe was speakinɡ, in a wai
tat ebeɾi iounɡ xiɾl wants to be looked at sometime, and bekause it
seemed ɾomantik to me i abe ɾemembeɾed te insident ebeɾ sinse. ʝs name
was xai ɡatsbi and i didn't lai eies on ʝm aɡain foɾ obeɾ fouɾ
ieaɾs--eben afteɾ i'd met ʝm on lonɡ island i didn't ɾealise it was te
same man.

tat was nineteen-sebenteen. bi te nekst ieaɾ i ad a few beauks miself,
and i beɡan to plai in touɾnaments, so i didn't see daisi beɾi often.
ʃe went wit a sliɡt͡ɬi oldeɾ kɾowd--wen ʃe went wit anione at aʝ.
wild ɾumoɾs weɾe siɾkulatinɡ about eɾ--ow eɾ moteɾ ad found eɾ
pakkinɡ eɾ baɡ one winteɾ niɡt to ɡo to new ioɾk and sai ɡoodbie to a
soldjeɾ wo was ɡoinɡ obeɾseas. ʃe was effektwaʝi pɾebented, but ʃe
wasn't on speakinɡ teɾms wit eɾ famili foɾ sebeɾal weeks. afteɾ
tat ʃe didn't plai aɾound wit te soldjeɾs ani moɾe but onli
wit a few flat-footed, ʃoɾt-siɡted iounɡ men in town wo kouldn't
xet into te aɾmi at aʝ.

bi te nekst autumn ʃe was ɡai aɡain, ɡai as ebeɾ. ʃe ad a debut
afteɾ te aɾmistise, and in febɾwaɾi ʃe was pɾesumabli enɡaxed to a
man fɾom new oɾleans. in xune ʃe marjed tom but͡ʃanan of t͡ʃikaɡo wit
moɾe pomp and siɾkumstanse tan lowisbiʝe ebeɾ knew befoɾe. e kame
down wit a wndɾed people in fouɾ pɾibate kaɾs and ʝɾed a wole
flooɾ of te seelbat͡ʃ otel, and te dai befoɾe te weddinɡ e ɡabe eɾ
a stɾinɡ of peaɾls balwed at tɾee wndɾed and fifti tousand doʝaɾs.

i was bɾidesmaid. i kame into eɾ ɾoom alf an ouɾ befoɾe te bɾidal
dinneɾ, and found eɾ liinɡ on eɾ bed as lobeli as te xune niɡt in
eɾ floweɾed dɾess--and as dɾunk as a monkei. ʃe ad a bott͡ɬe of
sauteɾne in one and and a letteɾ in te oteɾ.

" 'ɡɾatulate me," ʃe mutteɾed. "nebeɾ ad a dɾink befoɾe but o, ow i do
enxoi it."

"wat's te matteɾ, daisi?"

i was skaɾed, i kan teʝ iou; i'd nebeɾ seen a xiɾl like tat befoɾe.

"eɾe, deaɾis." ʃe ɡɾoped aɾound in a waste-basket ʃe ad wit eɾ
on te bed and puʝed out te stɾinɡ of peaɾls. "take 'em downstaiɾs and
xibe 'em bakk to woebeɾ tei belonɡ to. teʝ 'em aʝ daisi's t͡ʃanxe' eɾ
mine. sai 'daisi's t͡ʃanxe' eɾ mine!'."

ʃe beɡan to kɾi--ʃe kɾjed and kɾjed. i ɾuʃed out and found eɾ
moteɾ's maid and we lokked te dooɾ and ɡot eɾ into a kold bat. ʃe
wouldn't let ɡo of te letteɾ. ʃe took it into te tub wit eɾ and
skeesed it up into a wet baʝ, and onli let me leabe it in te
soap diʃ wen ʃe saw tat it was kominɡ to pjeses like snow.

but ʃe didn't sai anoteɾ woɾd. we ɡabe eɾ spiɾits of ammonja and put
ise on eɾ foɾeead and ooked eɾ bakk into eɾ dɾess and alf an
ouɾ lateɾ wen we walked out of te ɾoom te peaɾls weɾe aɾound eɾ
nekk and te insident was obeɾ. nekst dai at fibe o'klokk ʃe marjed tom
but͡ʃanan witout so mut͡ʃ as a ʃibeɾ and staɾted off on a tɾee monts'
tɾip to te sout seas.

i saw tem in santa baɾbaɾa wen tei kame bakk and i touɡt i'd
nebeɾ seen a xiɾl so mad about eɾ wsband. if e left te ɾoom foɾ a
minute ʃe'd look aɾound uneasili and sai "weɾe's tom ɡone?" and
weaɾ te most abstɾakted ekspɾessjon until ʃe saw ʝm kominɡ in te
dooɾ. ʃe used to sit on te sand wit ʝs ead in eɾ lap bi te ouɾ
ɾubbinɡ eɾ finxeɾs obeɾ ʝs eies and lookinɡ at ʝm wit unfatomable
deliɡt. it was tout͡ʃinɡ to see tem toxeteɾ--it made iou lauɡ in a
wʃed, fassinated wai. tat was in auɡwst. a week afteɾ i left santa
baɾbaɾa tom ɾan into a waɡon on te bentuɾa ɾoad one niɡt and ɾipped
a fɾont weel off ʝs kaɾ. te xiɾl wo was wit ʝm ɡot into te
papeɾs too bekause eɾ aɾm was bɾoken--ʃe was one of te t͡ʃambeɾmaids
in te santa baɾbaɾa otel.

te nekst apɾil daisi ad eɾ litt͡ɬe xiɾl and tei went to fɾanse foɾ a
ieaɾ. i saw tem one spɾinɡ in kannes and lateɾ in deaubiʝe and ten
tei kame bakk to t͡ʃikaɡo to sett͡ɬe down. daisi was populaɾ in t͡ʃikaɡo,
as iou know. tei mobed wit a fast kɾowd, aʝ of tem iounɡ and ɾit͡ʃ
and wild, but ʃe kame out wit an absoluteli peɾfekt ɾeputatjon.
peɾaps bekause ʃe doesn't dɾink. it's a ɡɾeat adbantaxe not to dɾink
amonɡ aɾd-dɾinkinɡ people. iou kan old iouɾ tonɡe and, moɾeobeɾ,
iou kan time ani litt͡ɬe ireɡwlaɾiti of iouɾ own so tat ebeɾibodi else
is so blind tat tei don't see oɾ kaɾe. peɾaps daisi nebeɾ went in
foɾ amouɾ at aʝ--and iet teɾe's sometʝnɡ in tat boise of eɾs. . . .

weʝ, about siks weeks aɡo, ʃe eaɾd te name ɡatsbi foɾ te fiɾst time
in ieaɾs. it was wen i asked iou--do iou ɾemembeɾ?--if iou knew ɡatsbi
in west eɡɡ. afteɾ iou ad ɡone ome ʃe kame into mi ɾoom and woke me
up, and said "wat ɡatsbi?" and wen i deskɾibed ʝm--i was alf
asleep--ʃe said in te stɾanxest boise tat it must be te man ʃe used
to know. it wasn't until ten tat i konnekted tʝs ɡatsbi wit te
offiseɾ in eɾ wʝte kaɾ.


wen xoɾdan bakeɾ ad finiʃed teʝinɡ aʝ tʝs we ad left te plasa
foɾ alf an ouɾ and weɾe dɾibinɡ in a biktoɾja tɾouɡ sentɾal paɾk.
te sun ad ɡone down beʝnd te taʝ apaɾtments of te mobje staɾs in
te west fiftjes and te kleaɾ boises of xiɾls, alɾeadi ɡateɾed like
kɾikkets on te ɡɾass, ɾose tɾouɡ te ot twiliɡt:


    "i'm te ʃeik of aɾabi,
    iouɾ lobe belonɡs to me.
    at niɡt wen iou'ɾe asleep,
    into iouɾ tent i'ʝ kɾeep----"


"it was a stɾanxe koinsidense," i said.

"but it wasn't a koinsidense at aʝ."

"wi not?"

"ɡatsbi bouɡt tat ouse so tat daisi would be xust akɾoss te bai."

ten it ad not been meɾeli te staɾs to wʝt͡ʃ e ad aspiɾed
on tat xune niɡt. e kame alibe to me, delibeɾed suddenli fɾom te
womb of ʝs puɾposeless splendoɾ.

"e wants to know--" kontinwed xoɾdan "--if iou'ʝ inbite daisi to iouɾ
ouse some afteɾnoon and ten let ʝm kome obeɾ."

te modesti of te demand ʃook me. e ad waited fibe ieaɾs and bouɡt a
mansjon weɾe e dispensed staɾliɡt to kaswal mots so tat e kould
"kome obeɾ" some afteɾnoon to a stɾanxeɾ's ɡaɾden.

"did i abe to know aʝ tʝs befoɾe e kould ask sut͡ʃ a litt͡ɬe tʝnɡ?"

"e's afɾaid. e's waited so lonɡ. e touɡt iou miɡt be offended.
iou see e's a ɾeɡwlaɾ touɡ undeɾneat it aʝ."

sometʝnɡ worjed me.

"wi didn't e ask iou to aranxe a meetinɡ?"

"e wants eɾ to see ʝs ouse," ʃe eksplained. "and iouɾ ouse is ɾiɡt
nekst dooɾ."

"o!"

"i tʝnk e alf ekspekted eɾ to wandeɾ into one of ʝs paɾtjes,
some niɡt," went on xoɾdan, "but ʃe nebeɾ did. ten e beɡan askinɡ
people kaswaʝi if tei knew eɾ, and i was te fiɾst one e found.
it was tat niɡt e sent foɾ me at ʝs danse, and iou ʃould abe
eaɾd te elaboɾate wai e woɾked up to it. of kouɾse, i immedjateli
suɡxested a lunt͡ʃeon in new ioɾk--and i touɡt e'd ɡo mad:

" 'i don't want to do anitʝnɡ out of te wai!' e kept saiinɡ. 'i want to
see eɾ ɾiɡt nekst dooɾ.'

"wen i said iou weɾe a paɾtikulaɾ fɾjend of tom's e staɾted to abandon
te wole idea. e doesn't know beɾi mut͡ʃ about tom, touɡ e sais e's
ɾead a t͡ʃikaɡo papeɾ foɾ ieaɾs xust on te t͡ʃanse of katt͡ʃinɡ a ɡlimpse
of daisi's name."

it was daɾk now, and as we dipped undeɾ a litt͡ɬe bɾidxe i put mi aɾm
aɾound xoɾdan's ɡolden ʃouldeɾ and dɾew eɾ towaɾd me and asked eɾ to
dinneɾ. suddenli i wasn't tʝnkinɡ of daisi and ɡatsbi ani moɾe but of
tʝs klean, aɾd, limited peɾson wo dealt in unibeɾsal skeptisism and
wo leaned bakk xauntili xust witʝn te siɾkle of mi aɾm. a pɾase beɡan
to beat in mi eaɾs wit a soɾt of eadi ekssitement: "teɾe aɾe onli te
puɾswed, te puɾswinɡ, te busi and te tiɾed."

"and daisi ouɡt to abe sometʝnɡ in eɾ life," muɾmuɾed xoɾdan to me.

"does ʃe want to see ɡatsbi?"

"ʃe's not to know about it. ɡatsbi doesn't want eɾ to know. iou'ɾe
xust supposed to inbite eɾ to tea."

we passed a barjeɾ of daɾk tɾees, and ten te fakade of fifti-nint
stɾeet, a blokk of delikate pale liɡt, beamed down into te paɾk.
unlike ɡatsbi and tom but͡ʃanan i ad no xiɾl wose disembodjed fase
floated alonɡ te daɾk koɾnises and blindinɡ siɡns and so i dɾew up te
xiɾl beside me, tiɡteninɡ mi aɾms. eɾ wan, skoɾnful mout smiled and so
i dɾew eɾ up aɡain, kloseɾ, tʝs time to mi fase.




t͡ʃapteɾ 5



wen i kame ome to west eɡɡ tat niɡt i was afɾaid foɾ a moment tat
mi ouse was on fiɾe. two o'klokk and te wole koɾneɾ of te peninsula
was blasinɡ wit liɡt wʝt͡ʃ feʝ unɾeal on te ʃɾubbeɾi and made tʝn
elonɡatinɡ ɡlints upon te ɾoadside wiɾes. tuɾninɡ a koɾneɾ i saw tat it
was ɡatsbi's ouse, lit fɾom toweɾ to seʝaɾ.

at fiɾst i touɡt it was anoteɾ paɾti, a wild ɾout tat ad ɾesolbed
itself into "ʝde-and-ɡo-seek" oɾ "saɾdines-in-te-boks" wit aʝ te
ouse tɾown open to te ɡame. but teɾe wasn't a sound. onli wind in
te tɾees wʝt͡ʃ blew te wiɾes and made te liɡts ɡo off and on aɡain
as if te ouse ad winked into te daɾkness. as mi taksi ɡɾoaned awai i
saw ɡatsbi walkinɡ towaɾd me akɾoss ʝs lawn.

"iouɾ plase looks like te woɾld's faiɾ," i said.

"does it?" e tuɾned ʝs eies towaɾd it absent͡ɬi. "i abe been ɡlansinɡ
into some of te ɾooms. let's ɡo to konei island, old spoɾt. in mi kaɾ."

"it's too late."

"weʝ, suppose we take a plunxe in te swimminɡ pool? i aben't made use
of it aʝ summeɾ."

"i'be ɡot to ɡo to bed."

"aʝ ɾiɡt."

e waited, lookinɡ at me wit suppɾessed eaxeɾness.

"i talked wit miss bakeɾ," i said afteɾ a moment. "i'm ɡoinɡ to kaʝ up
daisi tomorow and inbite eɾ obeɾ eɾe to tea."

"o, tat's aʝ ɾiɡt," e said kaɾelessli. "i don't want to put iou to
ani tɾouble."

"wat dai would swit iou?"

"wat dai would swit iou?" e korekted me kikkli. "i don't want to put
iou to ani tɾouble, iou see."

"ow about te dai afteɾ tomorow?" e konsideɾed foɾ a moment. ten,
wit ɾeluktanse:

"i want to xet te ɡɾass kut," e said.

we bot looked at te ɡɾass--teɾe was a ʃaɾp line weɾe mi ɾaɡxed lawn
ended and te daɾkeɾ, weʝ-kept ekspanse of ʝs beɡan. i suspekted tat
e meant mi ɡɾass.

"teɾe's anoteɾ litt͡ɬe tʝnɡ," e said unseɾtainli, and esitated.

"would iou ɾateɾ put it off foɾ a few dais?" i asked.

"o, it isn't about tat. at least----" e fumbled wit a seɾjes of
bexinninɡs. "wi, i touɡt--wi, look eɾe, old spoɾt, iou don't make
mut͡ʃ monei, do iou?"

"not beɾi mut͡ʃ."

tʝs seemed to ɾeassuɾe ʝm and e kontinwed moɾe konfident͡ɬi.

"i touɡt iou didn't, if iou'ʝ paɾdon mi--iou see, i kari on a
litt͡ɬe business on te side, a soɾt of sideline, iou undeɾstand. and i
touɡt tat if iou don't make beɾi mut͡ʃ--iou'ɾe seʝinɡ bonds, aɾen't
iou, old spoɾt?"

"tɾiinɡ to."

"weʝ, tʝs would inteɾest iou. it wouldn't take up mut͡ʃ of iouɾ
time and iou miɡt pikk up a nise bit of monei. it appens to be
a ɾateɾ konfidentjal soɾt of tʝnɡ."

i ɾealise now tat undeɾ diffeɾent siɾkumstanses tat konbeɾsatjon miɡt
abe been one of te kɾises of mi life. but, bekause te offeɾ was
obbjousli and takt͡ɬessli foɾ a seɾbise to be ɾendeɾed, i ad no t͡ʃoise
ekssept to kut ʝm off teɾe.

"i'be ɡot mi ands fuʝ," i said. "i'm mut͡ʃ oblixed but i kouldn't take
on ani moɾe woɾk."

"iou wouldn't abe to do ani business wit wolfʃjem." ebident͡ɬi e
touɡt tat i was ʃiinɡ awai fɾom te "ɡonneɡtjon" mentjoned at lunt͡ʃ,
but i assuɾed ʝm e was wɾonɡ. e waited a moment lonxeɾ, opinɡ i'd
bexin a konbeɾsatjon, but i was too absoɾbed to be ɾesponsibe, so e went
unwiʝinɡli ome.

te ebeninɡ ad made me liɡt-eaded and appi; i tʝnk i walked into a
deep sleep as i enteɾed mi fɾont dooɾ. so i didn't know weteɾ oɾ not
ɡatsbi went to konei island oɾ foɾ ow mani ouɾs e "ɡlansed into
ɾooms" wʝle ʝs ouse blased ɡaudili on. i kaʝed up daisi fɾom te
offise nekst moɾninɡ and inbited eɾ to kome to tea.

"don't bɾinɡ tom," i waɾned eɾ.

"wat?"

"don't bɾinɡ tom."

"wo is 'tom'?" ʃe asked innosent͡ɬi.

te dai aɡɾeed upon was pouɾinɡ ɾain. at eleben o'klokk a man in a
ɾainkoat dɾaɡxinɡ a lawn-moweɾ tapped at mi fɾont dooɾ and said tat
mɾ. ɡatsbi ad sent ʝm obeɾ to kut mi ɡɾass. tʝs ɾeminded me tat i
ad foɾɡotten to teʝ mi finn to kome bakk so i dɾobe into west eɡɡ
biʝaxe to seaɾt͡ʃ foɾ eɾ amonɡ soɡɡi wʝte-waʃed aʝeis and to bui
some kups and lemons and floweɾs.

te floweɾs weɾe unnesessaɾi, foɾ at two o'klokk a ɡɾeenouse aribed
fɾom ɡatsbi's, wit innumeɾable ɾeseptakles to kontain it. an ouɾ
lateɾ te fɾont dooɾ opened neɾbousli, and ɡatsbi in a wʝte flannel
swit, silbeɾ ʃiɾt and ɡold-koloɾed tje wrjed in. e was pale and
teɾe weɾe daɾk siɡns of sleeplessness beneat ʝs eies.

"is ebeɾitʝnɡ aʝ ɾiɡt?" e asked immedjateli.

"te ɡɾass looks fine, if tat's wat iou mean."

"wat ɡɾass?" e inkiɾed blankli. "o, te ɡɾass in te iaɾd." e looked
out te window at it, but xudxinɡ fɾom ʝs ekspɾessjon i don't beljebe
e saw a tʝnɡ.

"looks beɾi ɡood," e ɾemaɾked baɡeli. "one of te papeɾs said tei
touɡt te ɾain would stop about fouɾ. i tʝnk it was 'te xouɾnal.' abe
iou ɡot ebeɾitʝnɡ iou need in te ʃape of--of tea?"

i took ʝm into te pantɾi weɾe e looked a litt͡ɬe ɾepɾoat͡ʃfuʝi at te
finn. toxeteɾ we skɾutinised te twelbe lemon kakes fɾom te delikatessen
ʃop.

"wiʝ tei do?" i asked.

"of kouɾse, of kouɾse! tei'ɾe fine!" and e added oʝowli, ". . .old
spoɾt."

te ɾain kooled about alf-past tɾee to a damp mist tɾouɡ wʝt͡ʃ
okkasjonal tʝn dɾops swam like dew. ɡatsbi looked wit bakant eies
tɾouɡ a kopi of klai's "ekonomiks," staɾtinɡ at te finniʃ tɾead tat
ʃook te kitt͡ʃen flooɾ and peeɾinɡ towaɾd te bleaɾed windows fɾom time
to time as if a seɾjes of inbisible but alaɾminɡ appeninɡs weɾe takinɡ
plase outside. finaʝi e ɡot up and infoɾmed me in an unseɾtain boise
tat e was ɡoinɡ ome.

"wi's tat?"

"nobodi's kominɡ to tea. it's too late!" e looked at ʝs watt͡ʃ as if
teɾe was some pɾessinɡ demand on ʝs time elseweɾe. "i kan't wait
aʝ dai."

"don't be siʝi; it's xust two minutes to fouɾ."

e sat down, miseɾabli, as if i ad puʃed ʝm, and simultaneousli teɾe
was te sound of a motoɾ tuɾninɡ into mi lane. we bot xumped up and,
a litt͡ɬe arowed miself, i went out into te iaɾd.

undeɾ te dɾippinɡ baɾe lilak tɾees a laɾxe open kaɾ was kominɡ up te
dɾibe. it stopped. daisi's fase, tipped sidewais beneat a
tɾee-koɾneɾed labendeɾ at, looked out at me wit a bɾiɡt ekstatik
smile.

"is tʝs absoluteli weɾe iou libe, mi deaɾest one?"

te eksʝlaɾatinɡ ɾipple of eɾ boise was a wild tonik in te ɾain. i ad
to foʝow te sound of it foɾ a moment, up and down, wit mi eaɾ alone
befoɾe ani woɾds kame tɾouɡ. a damp stɾeak of aiɾ lai like a daʃ of
blwe paint akɾoss eɾ t͡ʃeek and eɾ and was wet wit ɡlisteninɡ dɾops as
i took it to elp eɾ fɾom te kaɾ.

"aɾe iou in lobe wit me," ʃe said low in mi eaɾ. "oɾ wi did i abe
to kome alone?"

"tat's te sekɾet of kast͡ɬe ɾakkɾent. teʝ iouɾ t͡ʃauffeuɾ to ɡo faɾ
awai and spend an ouɾ."

"kome bakk in an ouɾ, feɾdje." ten in a ɡɾabe muɾmuɾ, "ʝs name is
feɾdje."

"does te ɡasoline affekt ʝs nose?"

"i don't tʝnk so," ʃe said innosent͡ɬi. "wi?"

we went in. to mi obeɾwelminɡ suɾpɾise te libinɡ ɾoom was deseɾted.

"weʝ, tat's funni!" i eksklaimed.

"wat's funni?"

ʃe tuɾned eɾ ead as teɾe was a liɡt, diɡnifjed knokkinɡ at te fɾont
dooɾ. i went out and opened it. ɡatsbi, pale as deat, wit ʝs ands
plunxed like weiɡts in ʝs koat pokkets, was standinɡ in a puddle of
wateɾ ɡlaɾinɡ tɾaxikaʝi into mi eies.

wit ʝs ands stiʝ in ʝs koat pokkets e stalked bi me into te
aʝ, tuɾned ʃaɾpli as if e weɾe on a wiɾe and disappeaɾed into te
libinɡ ɾoom. it wasn't a bit funni. awaɾe of te loud beatinɡ of mi own
eaɾt i puʝed te dooɾ to aɡainst te inkɾeasinɡ ɾain.

foɾ alf a minute teɾe wasn't a sound. ten fɾom te libinɡ ɾoom i
eaɾd a soɾt of t͡ʃokinɡ muɾmuɾ and paɾt of a lauɡ foʝowed bi daisi's
boise on a kleaɾ aɾtifisial note.

"i seɾtainli am awfuʝi ɡlad to see iou aɡain."

a pause; it enduɾed oribli. i ad notʝnɡ to do in te aʝ so i went
into te ɾoom.

ɡatsbi, ʝs ands stiʝ in ʝs pokkets, was ɾeklininɡ aɡainst te
mantelpjese in a stɾained kounteɾfeit of peɾfekt ease, eben of boɾedom.
ʝs ead leaned bakk so faɾ tat it ɾested aɡainst te fase of a
defunkt mantelpjese klokk and fɾom tʝs positjon ʝs distɾauɡt eies
staɾed down at daisi wo was sittinɡ fɾiɡtened but ɡɾaseful on te
edxe of a stiff t͡ʃaiɾ.

"we'be met befoɾe," mutteɾed ɡatsbi. ʝs eies ɡlansed momentaɾili at
me and ʝs lips paɾted wit an aboɾtibe attempt at a lauɡ. lukkili
te klokk took tʝs moment to tilt danxeɾousli at te pɾessuɾe of ʝs
ead, weɾeupon e tuɾned and kauɡt it wit tɾemblinɡ finxeɾs and set
it bakk in plase. ten e sat down, ɾixidli, ʝs elbow on te aɾm of te
sofa and ʝs t͡ʃin in ʝs and.

"i'm sori about te klokk," e said.

mi own fase ad now assumed a deep tɾopikal buɾn. i kouldn't musteɾ up
a sinɡle kommonplase out of te tousand in mi ead.

"it's an old klokk," i told tem idjotikaʝi.

i tʝnk we aʝ beljebed foɾ a moment tat it ad smaʃed in pjeses on
te flooɾ.

"we aben't met foɾ mani ieaɾs," said daisi, eɾ boise as matteɾ-of-fakt
as it kould ebeɾ be.

"fibe ieaɾs nekst nobembeɾ."

te automatik kaliti of ɡatsbi's answeɾ set us aʝ bakk at least anoteɾ
minute. i ad tem bot on teiɾ feet wit te despeɾate suɡxestjon tat
tei elp me make tea in te kitt͡ʃen wen te demonjak finn bɾouɡt it in
on a tɾai.

amid te welkome konfusjon of kups and kakes a seɾtain pisikal desenki
establiʃed itself. ɡatsbi ɡot ʝmself into a ʃadow and wʝle daisi
and i talked looked konssientjousli fɾom one to te oteɾ of us wit
tense unappi eies. owebeɾ, as kalmness wasn't an end in itself i
made an ekskuse at te fiɾst possible moment and ɡot to mi feet.

"weɾe aɾe iou ɡoinɡ?" demanded ɡatsbi in immedjate alaɾm.

"i'ʝ be bakk."

"i'be ɡot to speak to iou about sometʝnɡ befoɾe iou ɡo."

e foʝowed me wildli into te kitt͡ʃen, klosed te dooɾ and wʝspeɾed:
"o, ɡod!" in a miseɾable wai.

"wat's te matteɾ?"

"tʝs is a terible mistake," e said, ʃakinɡ ʝs ead fɾom side to
side, "a terible, terible mistake."

"iou'ɾe xust embarassed, tat's aʝ," and lukkili i added: "daisi's
embarassed too."

"ʃe's embarassed?" e ɾepeated inkɾedulousli.

"xust as mut͡ʃ as iou aɾe."

"don't talk so loud."

"iou'ɾe aktinɡ like a litt͡ɬe boi," i bɾoke out impatjent͡ɬi. "not onli
tat but iou'ɾe ɾude. daisi's sittinɡ in teɾe aʝ alone."


e ɾaised ʝs and to stop mi woɾds, looked at me wit unfoɾxettable
ɾepɾoat͡ʃ and openinɡ te dooɾ kautjousli went bakk into te oteɾ ɾoom.

i walked out te bakk wai--xust as ɡatsbi ad wen e ad made ʝs
neɾbous siɾkwit of te ouse alf an ouɾ befoɾe--and ɾan foɾ a wxe
blakk knotted tɾee wose massed leabes made a fabɾik aɡainst te ɾain.
onse moɾe it was pouɾinɡ and mi ireɡwlaɾ lawn, weʝ-ʃabed bi
ɡatsbi's ɡaɾdeneɾ, abounded in smaʝ muddi swamps and pɾeʝstoɾik
maɾʃes. teɾe was notʝnɡ to look at fɾom undeɾ te tɾee ekssept
ɡatsbi's enoɾmous ouse, so i staɾed at it, like kant at ʝs t͡ʃuɾt͡ʃ
steeple, foɾ alf an ouɾ. a bɾeweɾ ad bwilt it eaɾli in te "peɾjod"
kɾase, a dekade befoɾe, and teɾe was a stoɾi tat e'd aɡɾeed to pai
fibe ieaɾs' takses on aʝ te neiɡboɾinɡ kottaxes if te owneɾs would
abe teiɾ ɾoofs tatt͡ʃed wit stɾaw. peɾaps teiɾ ɾefusal took te
eaɾt out of ʝs plan to found a famili--e went into an immedjate
dekline. ʝs t͡ʃildɾen sold ʝs ouse wit te blakk wɾeat stiʝ on te
dooɾ. ameɾikans, wʝle okkasjonaʝi wiʝinɡ to be seɾfs, abe alwais
been obstinate about beinɡ peasantɾi.

afteɾ alf an ouɾ te sun ʃone aɡain and te ɡɾoseɾ's automobile
ɾounded ɡatsbi's dɾibe wit te ɾaw mateɾjal foɾ ʝs seɾbants' dinneɾ--i
felt suɾe e wouldn't eat a spoonful. a maid beɡan openinɡ te uppeɾ
windows of ʝs ouse, appeaɾed momentaɾili in eat͡ʃ, and, leaninɡ fɾom a
laɾxe sentɾal bai, spat meditatibeli into te ɡaɾden. it was time i
went bakk. wʝle te ɾain kontinwed it ad seemed like te muɾmuɾ of
teiɾ boises, ɾisinɡ and sweʝinɡ a litt͡ɬe, now and ten, wit ɡwsts of
emotjon. but in te new silense i felt tat silense ad faʝen witʝn
te ouse too.

i went in--afteɾ makinɡ ebeɾi possible noise in te kitt͡ʃen ʃoɾt of
puʃinɡ obeɾ te stobe--but i don't beljebe tei eaɾd a sound. tei
weɾe sittinɡ at eiteɾ end of te kout͡ʃ lookinɡ at eat͡ʃ oteɾ as if
some kestjon ad been asked oɾ was in te aiɾ, and ebeɾi bestixe of
embarassment was ɡone. daisi's fase was smeaɾed wit teaɾs and wen i
kame in ʃe xumped up and beɡan wipinɡ at it wit eɾ andkeɾt͡ʃjef befoɾe
a miroɾ. but teɾe was a t͡ʃanxe in ɡatsbi tat was simpli konfoundinɡ.
e liteɾaʝi ɡlowed; witout a woɾd oɾ a xestuɾe of eksultatjon a new
weʝ-beinɡ ɾadjated fɾom ʝm and fiʝed te litt͡ɬe ɾoom.

"o, eʝo, old spoɾt," e said, as if e adn't seen me foɾ ieaɾs. i
touɡt foɾ a moment e was ɡoinɡ to ʃake ands.

"it's stopped ɾaininɡ."

"as it?" wen e ɾealised wat i was talkinɡ about, tat teɾe weɾe
twinkle-beʝs of sunʃine in te ɾoom, e smiled like a weateɾ man,
like an ekstatik patɾon of ɾekurent liɡt, and ɾepeated te news to
daisi. "wat do iou tʝnk of tat? it's stopped ɾaininɡ."

"i'm ɡlad, xai." eɾ tɾoat, fuʝ of at͡ʃinɡ, ɡɾjebinɡ beauti, told onli
of eɾ unekspekted xoi.

"i want iou and daisi to kome obeɾ to mi ouse," e said, "i'd like to
ʃow eɾ aɾound."

"iou'ɾe suɾe iou want me to kome?"

"absoluteli, old spoɾt."

daisi went upstaiɾs to waʃ eɾ fase--too late i touɡt wit wmiljatjon
of mi towels--wʝle ɡatsbi and i waited on te lawn.

"mi ouse looks weʝ, doesn't it?" e demanded. "see ow te wole
fɾont of it katt͡ʃes te liɡt."

i aɡɾeed tat it was splendid.

"ies." ʝs eies went obeɾ it, ebeɾi aɾt͡ʃed dooɾ and skaɾe toweɾ. "it took
me xust tɾee ieaɾs to eaɾn te monei tat bouɡt it."

"i touɡt iou ineɾited iouɾ monei."

"i did, old spoɾt," e said automatikaʝi, "but i lost most of it in
te biɡ panik--te panik of te waɾ."

i tʝnk e aɾdli knew wat e was saiinɡ, foɾ wen i asked ʝm wat
business e was in e answeɾed "tat's mi affaiɾ," befoɾe e ɾealised
tat it wasn't te appɾopɾjate ɾepli.

"o, i'be been in sebeɾal tʝnɡs," e korekted ʝmself. "i was in te
dɾuɡ business and ten i was in te oil business. but i'm not in eiteɾ
one now." e looked at me wit moɾe attentjon. "do iou mean iou'be been
tʝnkinɡ obeɾ wat i pɾoposed te oteɾ niɡt?"

befoɾe i kould answeɾ, daisi kame out of te ouse and two ɾows of bɾass
buttons on eɾ dɾess ɡleamed in te sunliɡt.

"tat wxe plase teɾe?" ʃe kɾjed pointinɡ.

"do iou like it?"

"i lobe it, but i don't see ow iou libe teɾe aʝ alone."

"i keep it alwais fuʝ of inteɾestinɡ people, niɡt and dai. people wo
do inteɾestinɡ tʝnɡs. selebɾated people."

instead of takinɡ te ʃoɾt kut alonɡ te sound we went down te ɾoad and
enteɾed bi te biɡ posteɾn. wit ent͡ʃantinɡ muɾmuɾs daisi admiɾed tʝs
aspekt oɾ tat of te feudal silowette aɡainst te ski, admiɾed te
ɡaɾdens, te spaɾklinɡ odoɾ of xonkils and te fɾoti odoɾ of awtoɾn
and plum blossoms and te pale ɡold odoɾ of kiss-me-at-te-ɡate.
it was stɾanxe to ɾeat͡ʃ te maɾble steps and find no stiɾ of bɾiɡt
dɾesses in and out te dooɾ, and eaɾ no sound but biɾd boises in te
tɾees.

and inside as we wandeɾed tɾouɡ maɾje antoinette musik ɾooms and
ɾestoɾatjon salons i felt tat teɾe weɾe ɡests konsealed beʝnd
ebeɾi kout͡ʃ and table, undeɾ oɾdeɾs to be bɾeatlessli silent until we
ad passed tɾouɡ. as ɡatsbi klosed te dooɾ of "te meɾton koʝexe
libɾaɾi" i kould abe swoɾn i eaɾd te owl-eied man bɾeak into
ɡost͡ɬi lauɡteɾ.

we went upstaiɾs, tɾouɡ peɾjod bedɾooms swated in ɾose and labendeɾ
silk and bibid wit new floweɾs, tɾouɡ dɾessinɡ ɾooms and poolɾooms,
and batɾooms wit sunken bats--intɾudinɡ into one t͡ʃambeɾ weɾe a
diʃebeʝed man in paxamas was doinɡ libeɾ ekseɾsises on te flooɾ. it
was mɾ. klipspɾinxeɾ, te "boaɾdeɾ." i ad seen ʝm wandeɾinɡ wnɡɾili
about te beat͡ʃ tat moɾninɡ. finaʝi we kame to ɡatsbi's own apaɾtment,
a bedɾoom and a bat and an adam studi, weɾe we sat down and dɾank a
ɡlass of some t͡ʃaɾtɾeuse e took fɾom a kupboaɾd in te waʝ.

e adn't onse seased lookinɡ at daisi and i tʝnk e ɾebalwed
ebeɾitʝnɡ in ʝs ouse akkoɾdinɡ to te measuɾe of ɾesponse it dɾew
fɾom eɾ weʝ-lobed eies. sometimes, too, e staɾed aɾound at ʝs
possessjons in a dased wai as touɡ in eɾ aktwal and astoundinɡ
pɾesense none of it was ani lonxeɾ ɾeal. onse e neaɾli toppled down a
fliɡt of staiɾs.

ʝs bedɾoom was te simplest ɾoom of aʝ--ekssept weɾe te dɾesseɾ was
ɡaɾniʃed wit a toilet set of puɾe duʝ ɡold. daisi took te bɾuʃ
wit deliɡt and smooted eɾ aiɾ, weɾeupon ɡatsbi sat down and
ʃaded ʝs eies and beɡan to lauɡ.

"it's te funnjest tʝnɡ, old spoɾt," e said ʝlaɾjousli. "i kan't--wen
i tɾi to----"

e ad passed bisibli tɾouɡ two states and was enteɾinɡ upon a tʝɾd.
afteɾ ʝs embarassment and ʝs unɾeasoninɡ xoi e was konsumed wit
wondeɾ at eɾ pɾesense. e ad been fuʝ of te idea so lonɡ, dɾeamed it
ɾiɡt tɾouɡ to te end, waited wit ʝs teet set, so to speak, at an
inkonseibable pitt͡ʃ of intensiti. now, in te ɾeaktjon, e was ɾunninɡ
down like an obeɾwound klokk.

ɾekobeɾinɡ ʝmself in a minute e opened foɾ us two wlkinɡ patent
kabinets wʝt͡ʃ eld ʝs massed swits and dɾessinɡ-ɡowns and tjes, and
ʝs ʃiɾts, piled like bɾikks in stakks a dosen ʝɡ.

"i'be ɡot a man in enɡland wo buis me klotes. e sends obeɾ a selektjon
of tʝnɡs at te bexinninɡ of eat͡ʃ season, spɾinɡ and faʝ."

e took out a pile of ʃiɾts and beɡan tɾowinɡ tem, one bi one
befoɾe us, ʃiɾts of ʃeeɾ linen and tʝkk silk and fine flannel
wʝt͡ʃ lost teiɾ folds as tei feʝ and kobeɾed te table in
mani-koloɾed disarai. wʝle we admiɾed e bɾouɡt moɾe and te soft
ɾit͡ʃ eap mounted ʝɡeɾ--ʃiɾts wit stɾipes and skɾoʝs and plaids in
koɾal and apple-ɡɾeen and labendeɾ and faint oɾanxe wit monoɡɾams of
indjan blwe. suddenli wit a stɾained sound, daisi bent eɾ ead into
te ʃiɾts and beɡan to kɾi stoɾmili.

"tei'ɾe sut͡ʃ beautiful ʃiɾts," ʃe sobbed, eɾ boise muffled in te
tʝkk folds. "it makes me sad bekause i'be nebeɾ seen sut͡ʃ--sut͡ʃ beautiful
ʃiɾts befoɾe."


afteɾ te ouse, we weɾe to see te ɡɾounds and te swimminɡ pool, and te
idɾoplane and te midsummeɾ floweɾs--but outside ɡatsbi's window it
beɡan to ɾain aɡain so we stood in a ɾow lookinɡ at te koruɡated
suɾfase of te sound.

"if it wasn't foɾ te mist we kould see iouɾ ome akɾoss te bai," said
ɡatsbi. "iou alwais abe a ɡɾeen liɡt tat buɾns aʝ niɡt at te end of
iouɾ dokk."

daisi put eɾ aɾm tɾouɡ ʝs abɾupt͡ɬi but e seemed absoɾbed
in wat e ad xust said. possibli it ad okkured to ʝm tat te
kolossal siɡnifikanse of tat liɡt ad now baniʃed foɾebeɾ. kompaɾed
to te ɡɾeat distanse tat ad sepaɾated ʝm fɾom daisi it ad seemed
beɾi neaɾ to eɾ, almost tout͡ʃinɡ eɾ. it ad seemed as klose as a staɾ
to te moon. now it was aɡain a ɡɾeen liɡt on a dokk. ʝs kount of
ent͡ʃanted obxekts ad diminiʃed bi one.

i beɡan to walk about te ɾoom, eksamininɡ baɾjous indefinite obxekts in
te alf daɾkness. a laɾxe potoɡɾap of an eldeɾli man in iat͡ʃtinɡ
kostume attɾakted me, wnɡ on te waʝ obeɾ ʝs desk.

"wo's tʝs?"

"tat? tat's mɾ. dan kodi, old spoɾt."

te name sounded faint͡ɬi familjaɾ.

"e's dead now. e used to be mi best fɾjend ieaɾs aɡo."

teɾe was a smaʝ piktuɾe of ɡatsbi, also in iat͡ʃtinɡ kostume, on te
buɾeau--ɡatsbi wit ʝs ead tɾown bakk defjant͡ɬi--taken appaɾent͡ɬi
wen e was about eiɡteen.

"i adoɾe it!" eksklaimed daisi. "te pompadouɾ! iou nebeɾ told me iou ad
a pompadouɾ--oɾ a iat͡ʃt."

"look at tʝs," said ɡatsbi kikkli. "eɾe's a lot of klippinɡs--about
iou."

tei stood side bi side eksamininɡ it. i was ɡoinɡ to ask to see te ɾubjes
wen te pone ɾanɡ and ɡatsbi took up te ɾeseibeɾ.

"ies. . . . weʝ, i kan't talk now. . . . i kan't talk now, old
spoɾt. . . . i said a smaʝ town. . . . e must know wat a smaʝ town
is. . . . weʝ, e's no use to us if detɾoit is ʝs idea of a smaʝ
town. . . ."

e ɾanɡ off.

"kome eɾe kikk!" kɾjed daisi at te window.

te ɾain was stiʝ faʝinɡ, but te daɾkness ad paɾted in te west,
and teɾe was a pink and ɡolden biʝow of foami klouds abobe te sea.

"look at tat," ʃe wʝspeɾed, and ten afteɾ a moment: "i'd like to
xust xet one of tose pink klouds and put iou in it and puʃ iou
aɾound."

i tɾjed to ɡo ten, but tei wouldn't eaɾ of it; peɾaps mi pɾesense
made tem feel moɾe satisfaktoɾili alone.

"i know wat we'ʝ do," said ɡatsbi, "we'ʝ abe klipspɾinxeɾ plai te
pjano."

e went out of te ɾoom kaʝinɡ "ewinɡ!" and ɾetuɾned in a few
minutes akkompanjed bi an embarassed, sliɡt͡ɬi woɾn iounɡ man wit
ʃeʝ-ɾimmed ɡlasses and skanti blonde aiɾ. e was now desent͡ɬi kloted
in a "spoɾt ʃiɾt" open at te nekk, sneakeɾs and dukk tɾouseɾs of a
nebulous we.

"did we interupt iouɾ ekseɾsises?" inkiɾed daisi politeli.

"i was asleep," kɾjed mɾ. klipspɾinxeɾ, in a spasm of embarassment.
"tat is, i'd been asleep. ten i ɡot up. . . ."

"klipspɾinxeɾ plais te pjano," said ɡatsbi, kuttinɡ ʝm off. "don't iou,
ewinɡ, old spoɾt?"

"i don't plai weʝ. i don't--i aɾdli plai at aʝ. i'm aʝ out of
pɾak----"

"we'ʝ ɡo downstaiɾs," interupted ɡatsbi. e flipped a switt͡ʃ. te
ɡɾei windows disappeaɾed as te ouse ɡlowed fuʝ of liɡt.

in te musik ɾoom ɡatsbi tuɾned on a solitaɾi lamp beside te pjano. e
lit daisi's siɡaɾette fɾom a tɾemblinɡ matt͡ʃ, and sat down wit eɾ on
a kout͡ʃ faɾ akɾoss te ɾoom weɾe teɾe was no liɡt sabe wat te
ɡleaminɡ flooɾ bounsed in fɾom te aʝ.

wen klipspɾinxeɾ ad plaied "te lobe nest" e tuɾned aɾound on te
bent͡ʃ and seaɾt͡ʃed unappili foɾ ɡatsbi in te ɡloom.

"i'm aʝ out of pɾaktise, iou see. i told iou i kouldn't plai. i'm aʝ
out of pɾak----"

"don't talk so mut͡ʃ, old spoɾt," kommanded ɡatsbi. "plai!"


    in te moɾninɡ,
    in te ebeninɡ,
       ain't we ɡot fun----

outside te wind was loud and teɾe was a faint flow of twndeɾ alonɡ te
sound. aʝ te liɡts weɾe ɡoinɡ on in west eɡɡ now; te elektɾik tɾains,
men-kariinɡ, weɾe plunxinɡ ome tɾouɡ te ɾain fɾom new ioɾk. it was
te ouɾ of a pɾofound wman t͡ʃanxe, and ekssitement was xeneɾatinɡ on
te aiɾ.


    one tʝnɡ's suɾe and notʝnɡ's suɾeɾ
    te ɾit͡ʃ xet ɾit͡ʃeɾ and te pooɾ xet--t͡ʃildɾen.
       in te meantime,
       in between time----


as i went obeɾ to sai ɡoodbie i saw tat te ekspɾessjon of bewildeɾment
ad kome bakk into ɡatsbi's fase, as touɡ a faint doubt ad okkured to
ʝm as to te kaliti of ʝs pɾesent appiness. almost fibe
ieaɾs! teɾe must abe been moments eben tat afteɾnoon wen
daisi tumbled ʃoɾt of ʝs dɾeams--not tɾouɡ eɾ own fault but
bekause of te kolossal bitaliti of ʝs iʝusjon. it ad ɡone beiond
eɾ, beiond ebeɾitʝnɡ. e ad tɾown ʝmself into it wit a kɾeatibe
passjon, addinɡ to it aʝ te time, dekkinɡ it out wit ebeɾi bɾiɡt
feateɾ tat dɾifted ʝs wai. no amount of fiɾe oɾ fɾeʃness kan
t͡ʃaʝenxe wat a man wiʝ stoɾe up in ʝs ɡost͡ɬi eaɾt.

as i watt͡ʃed ʝm e adxusted ʝmself a litt͡ɬe, bisibli. ʝs and took
old of eɾs and as ʃe said sometʝnɡ low in ʝs eaɾ e tuɾned towaɾd
eɾ wit a ɾuʃ of emotjon. i tʝnk tat boise eld ʝm most wit its
fluktwatinɡ, febeɾiʃ waɾmt bekause it kouldn't be obeɾ-dɾeamed--tat
boise was a deatless sonɡ.

tei ad foɾɡotten me, but daisi ɡlansed up and eld out eɾ and;
ɡatsbi didn't know me now at aʝ. i looked onse moɾe at tem and tei
looked bakk at me, ɾemoteli, possessed bi intense life. ten i went out
of te ɾoom and down te maɾble steps into te ɾain, leabinɡ tem teɾe
toxeteɾ.




t͡ʃapteɾ 6



about tʝs time an ambitjous iounɡ ɾepoɾteɾ fɾom new ioɾk aribed one
moɾninɡ at ɡatsbi's dooɾ and asked ʝm if e ad anitʝnɡ to sai.

"anitʝnɡ to sai about wat?" inkiɾed ɡatsbi politeli.

"wi,--ani statement to xibe out."

it tɾanspiɾed afteɾ a konfused fibe minutes tat te man ad eaɾd
ɡatsbi's name aɾound ʝs offise in a konnektjon wʝt͡ʃ e eiteɾ
wouldn't ɾebeal oɾ didn't fuʝi undeɾstand. tʝs was ʝs dai off
and wit laudable initjatibe e ad wrjed out "to see."

it was a ɾandom ʃot, and iet te ɾepoɾteɾ's instinkt was ɾiɡt. ɡatsbi's
notoɾjeti, spɾead about bi te wndɾeds wo ad aksepted ʝs
ospitaliti and so bekome autoɾitjes on ʝs past, ad inkɾeased
aʝ summeɾ until e feʝ xust ʃoɾt of beinɡ news. kontempoɾaɾi
lexends sut͡ʃ as te "undeɾɡɾound pipe-line to kanada" attat͡ʃed
temselbes to ʝm, and teɾe was one peɾsistent stoɾi tat e
didn't libe in a ouse at aʝ, but in a boat tat looked like a ouse
and was mobed sekɾet͡ɬi up and down te lonɡ island ʃoɾe. xust wi
tese inbentjons weɾe a souɾse of satisfaktjon to xames ɡat͡s of noɾt
dakota, isn't easi to sai.

xames ɡat͡s--tat was ɾeaʝi, oɾ at least leɡaʝi, ʝs name. e ad
t͡ʃanxed it at te axe of sebenteen and at te spesifik moment tat
witnessed te bexinninɡ of ʝs kaɾeeɾ--wen e saw dan kodi's iat͡ʃt dɾop
ant͡ʃoɾ obeɾ te most insidjous flat on lake supeɾjoɾ. it was xames ɡat͡s
wo ad been loafinɡ alonɡ te beat͡ʃ tat afteɾnoon in a toɾn ɡɾeen
xeɾsei and a paiɾ of kanbas pants, but it was alɾeadi xai ɡatsbi wo
borowed a ɾow-boat, puʝed out to te twolomee and infoɾmed kodi tat
a wind miɡt katt͡ʃ ʝm and bɾeak ʝm up in alf an ouɾ.

i suppose e'd ad te name ɾeadi foɾ a lonɡ time, eben ten. ʝs
paɾents weɾe ʃift͡ɬess and unsuksessful faɾm people--ʝs imaxinatjon ad
nebeɾ ɾeaʝi aksepted tem as ʝs paɾents at aʝ. te tɾut was tat
xai ɡatsbi, of west eɡɡ, lonɡ island, spɾanɡ fɾom ʝs platonik
konseptjon of ʝmself. e was a son of ɡod--a pɾase wʝt͡ʃ, if it means
anitʝnɡ, means xust tat--and e must be about ʝs fateɾ's business,
te seɾbise of a bast, bulɡaɾ and meɾetɾisious beauti. so e inbented
xust te soɾt of xai ɡatsbi tat a sebenteen-ieaɾ-old boi would be
likeli to inbent, and to tʝs konseptjon e was faitful to te end.

foɾ obeɾ a ieaɾ e ad been beatinɡ ʝs wai alonɡ te sout ʃoɾe of
lake supeɾjoɾ as a klam diɡxeɾ and a salmon fiʃeɾ oɾ in ani oteɾ
kapasiti tat bɾouɡt ʝm food and bed. ʝs bɾown, aɾdeninɡ bodi libed
natuɾaʝi tɾouɡ te alf fjeɾse, alf lasi woɾk of te bɾasinɡ dais.
e knew women eaɾli and sinse tei spoiled ʝm e bekame kontemptwous
of tem, of iounɡ biɾxins bekause tei weɾe iɡnoɾant, of te oteɾs
bekause tei weɾe isteɾikal about tʝnɡs wʝt͡ʃ in ʝs obeɾwelminɡ
self-absoɾptjon e took foɾ ɡɾanted.

but ʝs eaɾt was in a konstant, tuɾbulent ɾjot. te most ɡɾoteske
and fantastik konseits aunted ʝm in ʝs bed at niɡt. a unibeɾse
of ineffable ɡaudiness spun itself out in ʝs bɾain wʝle te
klokk tikked on te waʃ-stand and te moon soaked wit wet
liɡt ʝs tanɡled klotes upon te flooɾ. eat͡ʃ niɡt e added to te
patteɾn of ʝs fansies until dɾowsiness klosed down upon some bibid
ssene wit an oblibjous embɾase. foɾ a wʝle tese ɾebeɾjes pɾobided an
out͡ɬet foɾ ʝs imaxinatjon; tei weɾe a satisfaktoɾi ʝnt of te
unɾealiti of ɾealiti, a pɾomise tat te ɾokk of te woɾld was founded
sekuɾeli on a faiɾi's winɡ.

an instinkt towaɾd ʝs futuɾe ɡloɾi ad led ʝm, some monts befoɾe, to
te smaʝ luteɾan koʝexe of st. olaf in souteɾn minnesota. e staied
teɾe two weeks, dismaied at its feɾosious indiffeɾense to te dɾums of
ʝs destini, to destini itself, and despisinɡ te xanitoɾ's woɾk wit
wʝt͡ʃ e was to pai ʝs wai tɾouɡ. ten e dɾifted bakk to lake
supeɾjoɾ, and e was stiʝ seaɾt͡ʃinɡ foɾ sometʝnɡ to do on te dai
tat dan kodi's iat͡ʃt dɾopped ant͡ʃoɾ in te ʃaʝows alonɡ ʃoɾe.

kodi was fifti ieaɾs old ten, a pɾodukt of te nebada silbeɾ fjelds,
of te iukon, of ebeɾi ɾuʃ foɾ metal sinse sebenti-fibe. te
tɾansaktjons in montana koppeɾ tat made ʝm mani times a miʝjonaiɾe
found ʝm pisikaʝi ɾobust but on te beɾxe of soft-mindedness, and,
suspektinɡ tʝs an infinite numbeɾ of women tɾjed to sepaɾate ʝm fɾom
ʝs monei. te none too saboɾi ɾamifikatjons bi wʝt͡ʃ eʝa kaie, te
newspapeɾ woman, plaied madame de maintenon to ʝs weakness and sent ʝm
to sea in a iat͡ʃt, weɾe kommon knowledxe to te tuɾxid xouɾnalism
of 1902. e ad been koastinɡ alonɡ aʝ too ospitable ʃoɾes foɾ fibe
ieaɾs wen e tuɾned up as xames ɡat͡s's destini at litt͡ɬe xiɾl bai.

to te iounɡ ɡat͡s, ɾestinɡ on ʝs oaɾs and lookinɡ up at te ɾailed
dekk, te iat͡ʃt ɾepɾesented aʝ te beauti and ɡlamoɾ in te woɾld. i
suppose e smiled at kodi--e ad pɾobabli diskobeɾed tat people liked
ʝm wen e smiled. at ani ɾate kodi asked ʝm a few kestjons (one of
tem elisited te bɾand new name) and found tat e was kikk, and
ekstɾabaɡant͡ɬi ambitjous. a few dais lateɾ e took ʝm to dulut and
bouɡt ʝm a blwe koat, siks paiɾ of wʝte dukk tɾouseɾs and a iat͡ʃtinɡ
kap. and wen te twolomee left foɾ te west indjes and te baɾbaɾi
koast ɡatsbi left too.

e was emploied in a baɡe peɾsonal kapasiti--wʝle e ɾemained wit
kodi e was in tuɾn stewaɾd, mate, skippeɾ, sekɾetaɾi, and eben xailoɾ,
foɾ dan kodi sobeɾ knew wat labiʃ doinɡs dan kodi dɾunk miɡt soon be
about and e pɾobided foɾ sut͡ʃ kontinxensies bi ɾeposinɡ moɾe and moɾe
tɾust in ɡatsbi. te aranxement lasted fibe ieaɾs duɾinɡ wʝt͡ʃ te
boat went tɾee times aɾound te kontinent. it miɡt abe lasted
indefiniteli ekssept foɾ te fakt tat eʝa kaie kame on boaɾd one niɡt
in boston and a week lateɾ dan kodi inospitabli djed.

i ɾemembeɾ te poɾtɾait of ʝm up in ɡatsbi's bedɾoom, a ɡɾei, floɾid
man wit a aɾd empti fase--te pjoneeɾ debaut͡ʃee wo duɾinɡ one pase
of ameɾikan life bɾouɡt bakk to te easteɾn seaboaɾd te sabaxe
bjolense of te fɾontjeɾ bɾotel and saloon. it was indiɾekt͡ɬi dwe to
kodi tat ɡatsbi dɾank so litt͡ɬe. sometimes in te kouɾse of ɡai paɾtjes
women used to ɾub t͡ʃampaɡne into ʝs aiɾ; foɾ ʝmself e foɾmed te
abit of lettinɡ likoɾ alone.

and it was fɾom kodi tat e ineɾited monei--a leɡaki of twenti-fibe
tousand doʝaɾs. e didn't xet it. e nebeɾ undeɾstood te leɡal
debise tat was used aɡainst ʝm but wat ɾemained of te miʝjons
went intakt to eʝa kaie. e was left wit ʝs sinɡwlaɾli appɾopɾjate
edukatjon; te baɡe kontouɾ of xai ɡatsbi ad fiʝed out to te
substantjaliti of a man.


e told me aʝ tʝs beɾi mut͡ʃ lateɾ, but i'be put it down eɾe wit te
idea of eksplodinɡ tose fiɾst wild ɾumoɾs about ʝs antesedents, wʝt͡ʃ
weɾen't eben faint͡ɬi tɾwe. moɾeobeɾ e told it to me at a time of
konfusjon, wen i ad ɾeat͡ʃed te point of beljebinɡ ebeɾitʝnɡ and
notʝnɡ about ʝm. so i take adbantaxe of tʝs ʃoɾt alt, wʝle
ɡatsbi, so to speak, kauɡt ʝs bɾeat, to kleaɾ tʝs set of
miskonseptjons awai.

it was a alt, too, in mi assosiatjon wit ʝs affaiɾs. foɾ
sebeɾal weeks i didn't see ʝm oɾ eaɾ ʝs boise on te pone--most͡ɬi
i was in new ioɾk, tɾottinɡ aɾound wit xoɾdan and tɾiinɡ to
inɡɾatjate miself wit eɾ senile aunt--but finaʝi i went obeɾ to
ʝs ouse one sundai afteɾnoon. i adn't been teɾe two minutes wen
somebodi bɾouɡt tom but͡ʃanan in foɾ a dɾink. i was staɾt͡ɬed,
natuɾaʝi, but te ɾeaʝi suɾpɾisinɡ tʝnɡ was tat it adn't appened
befoɾe.

tei weɾe a paɾti of tɾee on oɾsebakk--tom and a man named sloane and
a pɾetti woman in a bɾown ɾidinɡ abit wo ad been teɾe pɾebjousli.

"i'm deliɡted to see iou," said ɡatsbi standinɡ on ʝs poɾt͡ʃ.
"i'm deliɡted tat iou dɾopped in."

as touɡ tei kaɾed!

"sit ɾiɡt down. abe a siɡaɾette oɾ a siɡaɾ." e walked aɾound te ɾoom
kikkli, ɾinxinɡ beʝs. "i'ʝ abe sometʝnɡ to dɾink foɾ iou in xust
a minute."

e was pɾofoundli affekted bi te fakt tat tom was teɾe. but e would be
uneasi aniow until e ad xiben tem sometʝnɡ, ɾealisinɡ in a baɡe
wai tat tat was aʝ tei kame foɾ. mɾ. sloane wanted notʝnɡ. a
lemonade? no, tanks. a litt͡ɬe t͡ʃampaɡne? notʝnɡ at aʝ,
tanks. . . . i'm sori----

"did iou abe a nise ɾide?"

"beɾi ɡood ɾoads aɾound eɾe."

"i suppose te automobiles----"

"iea."

mobed bi an iresistible impulse, ɡatsbi tuɾned to tom wo ad aksepted
te intɾoduktjon as a stɾanxeɾ.

"i beljebe we'be met someweɾe befoɾe, mɾ. but͡ʃanan."

"o, ies," said tom, ɡɾuffli polite but obbjousli not ɾemembeɾinɡ.
"so we did. i ɾemembeɾ beɾi weʝ."

"about two weeks aɡo."

"tat's ɾiɡt. iou weɾe wit nikk eɾe."

"i know iouɾ wife," kontinwed ɡatsbi, almost aɡɡɾessibeli.

"tat so?"

tom tuɾned to me.

"iou libe neaɾ eɾe, nikk?"

"nekst dooɾ."

"tat so?"

mɾ. sloane didn't enteɾ into te konbeɾsatjon but lounxed bakk auɡtili
in ʝs t͡ʃaiɾ; te woman said notʝnɡ eiteɾ--until unekspektedli, afteɾ
two ʝɡbaʝs, ʃe bekame koɾdjal.

"we'ʝ aʝ kome obeɾ to iouɾ nekst paɾti, mɾ. ɡatsbi," ʃe suɡxested.
"wat do iou sai?"

"seɾtainli. i'd be deliɡted to abe iou."

"be beɾ' nise," said mɾ. sloane, witout ɡɾatitude. "weʝ--tʝnk ouɡt to
be staɾtinɡ ome."

"please don't wri," ɡatsbi uɾxed tem. e ad kontɾol of ʝmself now
and e wanted to see moɾe of tom. "wi don't iou--wi don't iou stai foɾ
suppeɾ? i wouldn't be suɾpɾised if some oteɾ people dɾopped in fɾom
new ioɾk."

"iou kome to suppeɾ wit me," said te ladi entwsjastikaʝi.
"bot of iou."

tʝs inkluded me. mɾ. sloane ɡot to ʝs feet.

"kome alonɡ," e said--but to eɾ onli.

"i mean it," ʃe insisted. "i'd lobe to abe iou. lots of ɾoom."

ɡatsbi looked at me kestjoninɡli. e wanted to ɡo and e didn't see
tat mɾ. sloane ad deteɾmined e ʃouldn't.

"i'm afɾaid i won't be able to," i said.

"weʝ, iou kome," ʃe uɾxed, konsentɾatinɡ on ɡatsbi.

mɾ. sloane muɾmuɾed sometʝnɡ klose to eɾ eaɾ.

"we won't be late if we staɾt now," ʃe insisted aloud.

"i aben't ɡot a oɾse," said ɡatsbi. "i used to ɾide in te aɾmi but
i'be nebeɾ bouɡt a oɾse. i'ʝ abe to foʝow iou in mi kaɾ. ekskuse me
foɾ xust a minute."

te ɾest of us walked out on te poɾt͡ʃ, weɾe sloane and te ladi beɡan
an impassjoned konbeɾsatjon aside.

"mi ɡod, i beljebe te man's kominɡ," said tom. "doesn't e know ʃe
doesn't want ʝm?"

"ʃe sais ʃe does want ʝm."

"ʃe as a biɡ dinneɾ paɾti and e won't know a soul teɾe." e fɾowned.
"i wondeɾ weɾe in te debil e met daisi. bi ɡod, i mai be
old-faʃjoned in mi ideas, but women ɾun aɾound too mut͡ʃ tese dais to
swit me. tei meet aʝ kinds of kɾasi fiʃ."

suddenli mɾ. sloane and te ladi walked down te steps and mounted
teiɾ oɾses.

"kome on," said mɾ. sloane to tom, "we'ɾe late. we'be ɡot to ɡo." and ten
to me: "teʝ ʝm we kouldn't wait, wiʝ iou?"

tom and i ʃook ands, te ɾest of us ekst͡ʃanxed a kool nod and
tei tɾotted kikkli down te dɾibe, disappeaɾinɡ undeɾ te auɡwst
foljaxe xust as ɡatsbi wit at and liɡt obeɾkoat in and kame out
te fɾont dooɾ.

tom was ebident͡ɬi peɾtuɾbed at daisi's ɾunninɡ aɾound alone, foɾ on te
foʝowinɡ satuɾdai niɡt e kame wit eɾ to ɡatsbi's paɾti. peɾaps
ʝs pɾesense ɡabe te ebeninɡ its pekuljaɾ kaliti of oppɾessibeness--it
stands out in mi memoɾi fɾom ɡatsbi's oteɾ paɾtjes tat summeɾ. teɾe
weɾe te same people, oɾ at least te same soɾt of people, te same
pɾofusjon of t͡ʃampaɡne, te same mani-koloɾed, mani-keied kommotjon,
but i felt an unpleasantness in te aiɾ, a peɾbadinɡ aɾʃness tat
adn't been teɾe befoɾe. oɾ peɾaps i ad meɾeli ɡɾown used to it,
ɡɾown to aksept west eɡɡ as a woɾld komplete in itself, wit its own
standaɾds and its own ɡɾeat fiɡwɾes, sekond to notʝnɡ bekause it ad
no konssiousness of beinɡ so, and now i was lookinɡ at it aɡain,
tɾouɡ daisi's eies. it is inbaɾjabli saddeninɡ to look tɾouɡ new
eies at tʝnɡs upon wʝt͡ʃ iou abe ekspended iouɾ own poweɾs of
adxustment.

tei aribed at twiliɡt and as we stɾoʝed out amonɡ te spaɾklinɡ
wndɾeds daisi's boise was plaiinɡ muɾmuɾous tɾikks in eɾ tɾoat.

"tese tʝnɡs ekssite me so," ʃe wʝspeɾed. "if iou want to kiss me
ani time duɾinɡ te ebeninɡ, nikk, xust let me know and i'ʝ be ɡlad
to aranxe it foɾ iou. xust mentjon mi name. oɾ pɾesent a ɡɾeen kaɾd.
i'm xibinɡ out ɡɾeen----"

"look aɾound," suɡxested ɡatsbi.

"i'm lookinɡ aɾound. i'm abinɡ a maɾbelous----"

"iou must see te fases of mani people iou'be eaɾd about."

tom's aroɡant eies ɾoamed te kɾowd.

"we don't ɡo aɾound beɾi mut͡ʃ," e said. "in fakt i was xust tʝnkinɡ
i don't know a soul eɾe."

"peɾaps iou know tat ladi." ɡatsbi indikated a ɡoɾxeous, skaɾseli wman
oɾt͡ʃid of a woman wo sat in state undeɾ a wʝte plum tɾee. tom and daisi
staɾed, wit tat pekuljaɾli unɾeal feelinɡ tat akkompanjes te
ɾekoɡnitjon of a ʝteɾto ɡost͡ɬi selebɾiti of te mobjes.

"ʃe's lobeli," said daisi.

"te man bendinɡ obeɾ eɾ is eɾ diɾektoɾ."

e took tem seɾemonjousli fɾom ɡɾoup to ɡɾoup:

"mɾs. but͡ʃanan . . . and mɾ. but͡ʃanan----" afteɾ an instant's esitatjon
e added: "te polo plaieɾ."

"o no," obxekted tom kikkli, "not me."

but ebident͡ɬi te sound of it pleased ɡatsbi foɾ tom ɾemained "te polo
plaieɾ" foɾ te ɾest of te ebeninɡ.

"i'be nebeɾ met so mani selebɾitjes!" daisi eksklaimed. "i liked tat
man--wat was ʝs name?--wit te soɾt of blwe nose."

ɡatsbi identifjed ʝm, addinɡ tat e was a smaʝ pɾoduseɾ.

"weʝ, i liked ʝm aniow."

"i'd a litt͡ɬe ɾateɾ not be te polo plaieɾ," said tom pleasant͡ɬi, "i'd
ɾateɾ look at aʝ tese famous people in--in oblibjon."

daisi and ɡatsbi dansed. i ɾemembeɾ beinɡ suɾpɾised bi ʝs ɡɾaseful,
konseɾbatibe foks-tɾot--i ad nebeɾ seen ʝm danse befoɾe. ten tei
saunteɾed obeɾ to mi ouse and sat on te steps foɾ alf an ouɾ wʝle
at eɾ ɾekest i ɾemained watt͡ʃfuʝi in te ɡaɾden: "in kase teɾe's a
fiɾe oɾ a flood," ʃe eksplained, "oɾ ani akt of ɡod."

tom appeaɾed fɾom ʝs oblibjon as we weɾe sittinɡ down to suppeɾ toxeteɾ.
"do iou mind if i eat wit some people obeɾ eɾe?" e said. "a feʝow's
xettinɡ off some funni stuff."

"ɡo aead," answeɾed daisi xenjaʝi, "and if iou want to take down ani
addɾesses eɾe's mi litt͡ɬe ɡold pensil. . . ." ʃe looked aɾound afteɾ
a moment and told me te xiɾl was "kommon but pɾetti," and i knew tat
ekssept foɾ te alf ouɾ ʃe'd been alone wit ɡatsbi ʃe wasn't abinɡ
a ɡood time.

we weɾe at a paɾtikulaɾli tipsi table. tat was mi fault--ɡatsbi ad
been kaʝed to te pone and i'd enxoied tese same people onli two
weeks befoɾe. but wat ad amused me ten tuɾned septik on te aiɾ now.

"ow do iou feel, miss baedekeɾ?"

te xiɾl addɾessed was tɾiinɡ, unsuksessfuʝi, to slump aɡainst mi
ʃouldeɾ. at tʝs inkiɾi ʃe sat up and opened eɾ eies.

"wa?"

a massibe and letaɾxik woman, wo ad been uɾxinɡ daisi to plai ɡolf
wit eɾ at te lokal klub tomorow, spoke in miss baedekeɾ's defense:

"o, ʃe's aʝ ɾiɡt now. wen ʃe's ad fibe oɾ siks kokktails ʃe alwais
staɾts skɾeaminɡ like tat. i teʝ eɾ ʃe ouɡt to leabe it alone."

"i do leabe it alone," affiɾmed te akkused oʝowli.

"we eaɾd iou ieʝinɡ, so i said to dok sibet eɾe: 'teɾe's somebodi
tat needs iouɾ elp, dok.' "

"ʃe's mut͡ʃ oblixed, i'm suɾe," said anoteɾ fɾjend, witout ɡɾatitude.
"but iou ɡot eɾ dɾess aʝ wet wen iou stukk eɾ ead in te pool."

"anitʝnɡ i ate is to xet mi ead stukk in a pool," mumbled miss
baedekeɾ. "tei almost dɾowned me onse obeɾ in new xeɾsei."

"ten iou ouɡt to leabe it alone," kounteɾed doktoɾ sibet.

"speak foɾ iouɾself!" kɾjed miss baedekeɾ bjolent͡ɬi. "iouɾ and ʃakes.
i wouldn't let iou opeɾate on me!"

it was like tat. almost te last tʝnɡ i ɾemembeɾ was standinɡ wit
daisi and watt͡ʃinɡ te mobinɡ piktuɾe diɾektoɾ and ʝs staɾ. tei weɾe
stiʝ undeɾ te wʝte plum tɾee and teiɾ fases weɾe tout͡ʃinɡ ekssept
foɾ a pale tʝn ɾai of moonliɡt between. it okkured to me tat e
ad been beɾi slowli bendinɡ towaɾd eɾ aʝ ebeninɡ to attain tʝs
pɾoksimiti, and eben wʝle i watt͡ʃed i saw ʝm stoop one ultimate deɡɾee
and kiss at eɾ t͡ʃeek.

"i like eɾ," said daisi, "i tʝnk ʃe's lobeli."

but te ɾest offended eɾ--and inaɾɡwabli, bekause it wasn't a xestuɾe but
an emotjon. ʃe was appaʝed bi west eɡɡ, tʝs unpɾesedented "plase"
tat bɾoadwai ad beɡotten upon a lonɡ island fiʃinɡ biʝaxe--appaʝed
bi its ɾaw biɡoɾ tat t͡ʃafed undeɾ te old eupemisms and bi te too
obtɾusibe fate tat eɾded its inabitants alonɡ a ʃoɾt kut fɾom notʝnɡ
to notʝnɡ. ʃe saw sometʝnɡ awful in te beɾi simplisiti ʃe failed
to undeɾstand.

i sat on te fɾont steps wit tem wʝle tei waited foɾ teiɾ kaɾ. it
was daɾk eɾe in fɾont: onli te bɾiɡt dooɾ sent ten skaɾe feet of
liɡt boʝeiinɡ out into te soft blakk moɾninɡ. sometimes a ʃadow
mobed aɡainst a dɾessinɡ-ɾoom blind abobe, ɡabe wai to anoteɾ ʃadow,
an indefinite pɾosessjon of ʃadows, wo ɾouxed and powdeɾed in an
inbisible ɡlass.

"wo is tʝs ɡatsbi aniow?" demanded tom suddenli. "some biɡ boot͡ɬeɡxeɾ?"

"weɾe'd iou eaɾ tat?" i inkiɾed.

"i didn't eaɾ it. i imaxined it. a lot of tese newli ɾit͡ʃ people aɾe
xust biɡ boot͡ɬeɡxeɾs, iou know."

"not ɡatsbi," i said ʃoɾt͡ɬi.

e was silent foɾ a moment. te pebbles of te dɾibe kɾunt͡ʃed undeɾ ʝs
feet.

"weʝ, e seɾtainli must abe stɾained ʝmself to xet tʝs menaxeɾje
toxeteɾ."

a bɾeese stired te ɡɾei ase of daisi's fuɾ koʝaɾ.

"at least tei'ɾe moɾe inteɾestinɡ tan te people we know," ʃe said
wit an effoɾt.

"iou didn't look so inteɾested."

"weʝ, i was."

tom lauɡed and tuɾned to me.

"did iou notise daisi's fase wen tat xiɾl asked eɾ to put eɾ undeɾ
a kold ʃoweɾ?"

daisi beɡan to sinɡ wit te musik in a wski, ɾitmik wʝspeɾ,
bɾinxinɡ out a meaninɡ in eat͡ʃ woɾd tat it ad nebeɾ ad
befoɾe and would nebeɾ abe aɡain. wen te melodi ɾose, eɾ boise
bɾoke up sweet͡ɬi, foʝowinɡ it, in a wai kontɾalto boises abe, and
eat͡ʃ t͡ʃanxe tipped out a litt͡ɬe of eɾ waɾm wman maxik upon te aiɾ.

"lots of people kome wo aben't been inbited," ʃe said suddenli.
"tat xiɾl adn't been inbited. tei simpli foɾse teiɾ wai in and e's
too polite to obxekt."

"i'd like to know wo e is and wat e does," insisted tom. "and i tʝnk
i'ʝ make a point of findinɡ out."

"i kan teʝ iou ɾiɡt now," ʃe answeɾed. "e owned some dɾuɡ stoɾes,
a lot of dɾuɡ stoɾes. e bwilt tem up ʝmself."

te dilatoɾi limousine kame ɾoʝinɡ up te dɾibe.

"ɡood niɡt, nikk," said daisi.

eɾ ɡlanse left me and souɡt te liɡted top of te steps weɾe
"tɾee o'klokk in te moɾninɡ," a neat, sad litt͡ɬe walt͡s of tat ieaɾ,
was dɾiftinɡ out te open dooɾ. afteɾ aʝ, in te beɾi kaswalness of
ɡatsbi's paɾti teɾe weɾe ɾomantik possibilitjes totaʝi absent fɾom
eɾ woɾld. wat was it up teɾe in te sonɡ tat seemed to be kaʝinɡ
eɾ bakk inside? wat would appen now in te dim inkalkulable ouɾs?
peɾaps some unbeljebable ɡest would aribe, a peɾson infiniteli ɾaɾe
and to be maɾbeʝed at, some autentikaʝi ɾadjant iounɡ xiɾl wo wit
one fɾeʃ ɡlanse at ɡatsbi, one moment of maxikal enkounteɾ, would blot
out tose fibe ieaɾs of unwabeɾinɡ debotjon.


i staied late tat niɡt. ɡatsbi asked me to wait until e was fɾee
and i linxeɾed in te ɡaɾden until te inebitable swimminɡ paɾti ad ɾun
up, t͡ʃiʝed and eksalted, fɾom te blakk beat͡ʃ, until te liɡts weɾe
ekstinɡiʃed in te ɡest ɾooms obeɾead. wen e kame down te steps at
last te tanned skin was dɾawn unuswaʝi tiɡt on ʝs fase, and ʝs eies
weɾe bɾiɡt and tiɾed.

"ʃe didn't like it," e said immedjateli.

"of kouɾse ʃe did."

"ʃe didn't like it," e insisted. "ʃe didn't abe a ɡood time."

e was silent and i ɡessed at ʝs unutteɾable depɾessjon.

"i feel faɾ awai fɾom eɾ," e said. "it's aɾd to make eɾ undeɾstand."

"iou mean about te danse?"

"te danse?" e dismissed aʝ te danses e ad xiben wit a snap of
ʝs finxeɾs. "old spoɾt, te danse is unimpoɾtant."

e wanted notʝnɡ less of daisi tan tat ʃe ʃould ɡo to tom and sai:
"i nebeɾ lobed iou." afteɾ ʃe ad obliteɾated tɾee ieaɾs wit tat
sentense tei kould deside upon te moɾe pɾaktikal measuɾes to be taken.
one of tem was tat, afteɾ ʃe was fɾee, tei weɾe to ɡo bakk to
lowisbiʝe and be marjed fɾom eɾ ouse--xust as if it weɾe fibe
ieaɾs aɡo.

"and ʃe doesn't undeɾstand," e said. "ʃe used to be able to
undeɾstand. we'd sit foɾ ouɾs----"

e bɾoke off and beɡan to walk up and down a desolate pat of fɾwit ɾinds
and diskaɾded faboɾs and kɾuʃed floweɾs.

"i wouldn't ask too mut͡ʃ of eɾ," i bentuɾed. "iou kan't ɾepeat te past."

"kan't ɾepeat te past?" e kɾjed inkɾedulousli. "wi of kouɾse iou kan!"

e looked aɾound ʝm wildli, as if te past weɾe luɾkinɡ eɾe in te
ʃadow of ʝs ouse, xust out of ɾeat͡ʃ of ʝs and.

"i'm ɡoinɡ to fiks ebeɾitʝnɡ xust te wai it was befoɾe," e said,
noddinɡ deteɾminedli. "ʃe'ʝ see."

e talked a lot about te past and i ɡateɾed tat e wanted to ɾekobeɾ
sometʝnɡ, some idea of ʝmself peɾaps, tat ad ɡone into lobinɡ daisi.
ʝs life ad been konfused and disoɾdeɾed sinse ten, but if e kould
onse ɾetuɾn to a seɾtain staɾtinɡ plase and ɡo obeɾ it aʝ slowli, e
kould find out wat tat tʝnɡ was. . . .

. . . one autumn niɡt, fibe ieaɾs befoɾe, tei ad been walkinɡ down
te stɾeet wen te leabes weɾe faʝinɡ, and tei kame to a plase weɾe
teɾe weɾe no tɾees and te sidewalk was wʝte wit moonliɡt.
tei stopped eɾe and tuɾned towaɾd eat͡ʃ oteɾ. now it was a kool niɡt
wit tat misteɾjous ekssitement in it wʝt͡ʃ komes at te two t͡ʃanxes of
te ieaɾ. te kjet liɡts in te ouses weɾe wmminɡ out into te
daɾkness and teɾe was a stiɾ and bust͡ɬe amonɡ te staɾs. out of te
koɾneɾ of ʝs eie ɡatsbi saw tat te blokks of te sidewalk ɾeaʝi
foɾmed a laddeɾ and mounted to a sekɾet plase abobe te tɾees--e kould
klimb to it, if e klimbed alone, and onse teɾe e kould sukk on te
pap of life, ɡwlp down te inkompaɾable milk of wondeɾ.

ʝs eaɾt beat fasteɾ and fasteɾ as daisi's wʝte fase kame up to ʝs
own. e knew tat wen e kissed tʝs xiɾl, and foɾebeɾ wed ʝs
unutteɾable bisjons to eɾ peɾiʃable bɾeat, ʝs mind would nebeɾ ɾomp
aɡain like te mind of ɡod. so e waited, listeninɡ foɾ a moment lonxeɾ
to te tuninɡ foɾk tat ad been stɾukk upon a staɾ. ten e kissed
eɾ. at ʝs lips' tout͡ʃ ʃe blossomed foɾ ʝm like a floweɾ and te
inkaɾnatjon was komplete.

tɾouɡ aʝ e said, eben tɾouɡ ʝs appaʝinɡ sentimentaliti, i was
ɾeminded of sometʝnɡ--an elusibe ɾitm, a fɾaɡment of lost woɾds, tat
i ad eaɾd someweɾe a lonɡ time aɡo. foɾ a moment a pɾase tɾjed to
take ʃape in mi mout and mi lips paɾted like a dumb man's, as touɡ
teɾe was moɾe stɾuɡɡlinɡ upon tem tan a wisp of staɾt͡ɬed aiɾ. but
tei made no sound and wat i ad almost ɾemembeɾed was
unkommunikable foɾebeɾ.




t͡ʃapteɾ 7



it was wen kuɾjositi about ɡatsbi was at its ʝɡest tat te liɡts
in ʝs ouse failed to ɡo on one satuɾdai niɡt--and, as obskuɾeli as it
ad beɡwn, ʝs kaɾeeɾ as tɾimalt͡ʃjo was obeɾ.

onli ɡɾadwaʝi did i bekome awaɾe tat te automobiles wʝt͡ʃ tuɾned
ekspektant͡ɬi into ʝs dɾibe staied foɾ xust a minute and ten dɾobe
sulkili awai. wondeɾinɡ if e weɾe sikk i went obeɾ to find out--an
unfamiljaɾ but͡ɬeɾ wit a biʝainous fase skinted at me suspisiousli
fɾom te dooɾ.

"is mɾ. ɡatsbi sikk?"

"nope." afteɾ a pause e added "siɾ" in a dilatoɾi, ɡɾudxinɡ wai.

"i adn't seen ʝm aɾound, and i was ɾateɾ worjed. teʝ ʝm mɾ. karawai
kame obeɾ."

"wo?" e demanded ɾudeli.

"karawai."

"karawai. aʝ ɾiɡt, i'ʝ teʝ ʝm." abɾupt͡ɬi e slammed te dooɾ.

mi finn infoɾmed me tat ɡatsbi ad dismissed ebeɾi seɾbant in ʝs
ouse a week aɡo and ɾeplased tem wit alf a dosen oteɾs, wo nebeɾ
went into west eɡɡ biʝaxe to be bɾibed bi te tɾadesmen, but oɾdeɾed
modeɾate suppljes obeɾ te telepone. te ɡɾoseɾi boi ɾepoɾted tat te
kitt͡ʃen looked like a piɡsti, and te xeneɾal opinjon in te biʝaxe was
tat te new people weɾen't seɾbants at aʝ.

nekst dai ɡatsbi kaʝed me on te pone.

"ɡoinɡ awai?" i inkiɾed.

"no, old spoɾt."

"i eaɾ iou fiɾed aʝ iouɾ seɾbants."

"i wanted somebodi wo wouldn't ɡossip. daisi komes obeɾ kite often--in
te afteɾnoons."

so te wole kaɾabansaɾi ad faʝen in like a kaɾd ouse at te
disappɾobal in eɾ eies.

"tei'ɾe some people wolfʃjem wanted to do sometʝnɡ foɾ. tei'ɾe aʝ
bɾoteɾs and sisteɾs. tei used to ɾun a smaʝ otel."

"i see."

e was kaʝinɡ up at daisi's ɾekest--would i kome to lunt͡ʃ at
eɾ ouse tomorow? miss bakeɾ would be teɾe. alf an ouɾ lateɾ
daisi eɾself teleponed and seemed ɾeljebed to find tat i was kominɡ.
sometʝnɡ was up. and iet i kouldn't beljebe tat tei would t͡ʃoose
tʝs okkasjon foɾ a ssene--espesiaʝi foɾ te ɾateɾ arowinɡ ssene
tat ɡatsbi ad out͡ɬined in te ɡaɾden.

te nekst dai was bɾoilinɡ, almost te last, seɾtainli te waɾmest, of
te summeɾ. as mi tɾain emeɾxed fɾom te tunnel into sunliɡt, onli te
ot wʝst͡ɬes of te natjonal biskwit kompani bɾoke te simmeɾinɡ wʃ
at noon. te stɾaw seats of te kaɾ obeɾed on te edxe of kombustjon;
te woman nekst to me peɾspiɾed delikateli foɾ a wʝle into eɾ wʝte
ʃiɾtwaist, and ten, as eɾ newspapeɾ dampened undeɾ eɾ finxeɾs,
lapsed despaiɾinɡli into deep eat wit a desolate kɾi. eɾ pokket-book
slapped to te flooɾ.

"o, mi!" ʃe ɡasped.

i pikked it up wit a weaɾi bend and anded it bakk to eɾ, oldinɡ it
at aɾm's lenɡt and bi te ekstɾeme tip of te koɾneɾs to indikate tat
i ad no desiɡns upon it--but ebeɾi one neaɾ bi, inkludinɡ te woman,
suspekted me xust te same.

"ot!" said te konduktoɾ to familjaɾ fases. "some weateɾ! ot! ot! ot!
is it ot enouɡ foɾ iou? is it ot? is it . . . ?"

mi kommutatjon tikket kame bakk to me wit a daɾk stain fɾom ʝs and.
tat ani one ʃould kaɾe in tʝs eat wose fluʃed lips e kissed,
wose ead made damp te paxama pokket obeɾ ʝs eaɾt!

. . . tɾouɡ te aʝ of te but͡ʃanans' ouse blew a faint wind,
kariinɡ te sound of te telepone beʝ out to ɡatsbi and me as we
waited at te dooɾ.

"te masteɾ's bodi!" ɾoaɾed te but͡ɬeɾ into te moutpjese. "i'm sori,
madame, but we kan't fuɾniʃ it--it's faɾ too ot to tout͡ʃ tʝs noon!"

wat e ɾeaʝi said was: "ies . . . ies . . . i'ʝ see."

e set down te ɾeseibeɾ and kame towaɾd us, ɡlisteninɡ sliɡt͡ɬi, to take
ouɾ stiff stɾaw ats.

"madame ekspekts iou in te salon!" e kɾjed, needlessli indikatinɡ te
diɾektjon. in tʝs eat ebeɾi ekstɾa xestuɾe was an affɾont to te
kommon stoɾe of life.

te ɾoom, ʃadowed weʝ wit awninɡs, was daɾk and kool. daisi and
xoɾdan lai upon an enoɾmous kout͡ʃ, like silbeɾ idols, weiɡʝnɡ down
teiɾ own wʝte dɾesses aɡainst te sinxinɡ bɾeese of te fans.

"we kan't mobe," tei said toxeteɾ.

xoɾdan's finxeɾs, powdeɾed wʝte obeɾ teiɾ tan, ɾested foɾ a moment in
mine.

"and mɾ. tomas but͡ʃanan, te atlete?" i inkiɾed.

simultaneousli i eaɾd ʝs boise, ɡɾuff, muffled, wski, at te aʝ
telepone.

ɡatsbi stood in te senteɾ of te kɾimson kaɾpet and ɡased aɾound wit
fassinated eies. daisi watt͡ʃed ʝm and lauɡed, eɾ sweet, ekssitinɡ
lauɡ; a tini ɡwst of powdeɾ ɾose fɾom eɾ bosom into te aiɾ.

"te ɾumoɾ is," wʝspeɾed xoɾdan, "tat tat's tom's xiɾl on te
telepone."

we weɾe silent. te boise in te aʝ ɾose ʝɡ wit annoianse.
"beɾi weʝ, ten, i won't seʝ iou te kaɾ at aʝ. . . . i'm
undeɾ no obliɡatjons to iou at aʝ. . . . and as foɾ iouɾ boteɾinɡ me
about it at lunt͡ʃ time i won't stand tat at aʝ!"

"oldinɡ down te ɾeseibeɾ," said daisi kinikaʝi.

"no, e's not," i assuɾed eɾ. "it's a bona fide deal. i appen to
know about it."

tom flunɡ open te dooɾ, blokked out its spase foɾ a moment wit ʝs
tʝkk bodi, and wrjed into te ɾoom.

"mɾ. ɡatsbi!" e put out ʝs bɾoad, flat and wit weʝ-konsealed
dislike. "i'm ɡlad to see iou, siɾ. . . . nikk. . . ."

"make us a kold dɾink," kɾjed daisi.

as e left te ɾoom aɡain ʃe ɡot up and went obeɾ to ɡatsbi and puʝed
ʝs fase down kissinɡ ʝm on te mout.

"iou know i lobe iou," ʃe muɾmuɾed.

"iou foɾxet teɾe's a ladi pɾesent," said xoɾdan.

daisi looked aɾound doubtfuʝi.

"iou kiss nikk too."

"wat a low, bulɡaɾ xiɾl!"

"i don't kaɾe!" kɾjed daisi and beɡan to kloɡ on te bɾikk fiɾeplase.
ten ʃe ɾemembeɾed te eat and sat down ɡiltili on te kout͡ʃ xust as
a fɾeʃli laundeɾed nuɾse leadinɡ a litt͡ɬe xiɾl kame into te ɾoom.

"bles-sed pɾe-sious," ʃe kɾooned, oldinɡ out eɾ aɾms. "kome to iouɾ
own moteɾ tat lobes iou."

te t͡ʃild, ɾelinkiʃed bi te nuɾse, ɾuʃed akɾoss te ɾoom and ɾooted
ʃili into eɾ moteɾ's dɾess.

"te bles-sed pɾe-sious! did moteɾ xet powdeɾ on iouɾ old ieʝowi
aiɾ? stand up now, and sai ow-de-do."

ɡatsbi and i in tuɾn leaned down and took te smaʝ ɾeluktant and.
afteɾwaɾd e kept lookinɡ at te t͡ʃild wit suɾpɾise. i don't tʝnk e ad
ebeɾ ɾeaʝi beljebed in its eksistense befoɾe.

"i ɡot dɾessed befoɾe lunt͡ʃeon," said te t͡ʃild, tuɾninɡ eaxeɾli to
daisi.

"tat's bekause iouɾ moteɾ wanted to ʃow iou off." eɾ fase bent into
te sinɡle wɾinkle of te smaʝ wʝte nekk. "iou dɾeam, iou. iou absolute
litt͡ɬe dɾeam."

"ies," admitted te t͡ʃild kalmli. "aunt xoɾdan's ɡot on a wʝte
dɾess too."

"ow do iou like moteɾ's fɾjends?" daisi tuɾned eɾ aɾound so tat ʃe
fased ɡatsbi. "do iou tʝnk tei'ɾe pɾetti?"

"weɾe's daddi?"

"ʃe doesn't look like eɾ fateɾ," eksplained daisi. "ʃe looks like me.
ʃe's ɡot mi aiɾ and ʃape of te fase."

daisi sat bakk upon te kout͡ʃ. te nuɾse took a step foɾwaɾd and eld
out eɾ and.

"kome, pammi."

"ɡoodbie, sweeteaɾt!"

wit a ɾeluktant bakkwaɾd ɡlanse te weʝ-dissiplined t͡ʃild eld to eɾ
nuɾse's and and was puʝed out te dooɾ, xust as tom kame bakk,
pɾesedinɡ fouɾ xin ɾikkeis tat klikked fuʝ of ise.

ɡatsbi took up ʝs dɾink.

"tei seɾtainli look kool," e said, wit bisible tensjon.

we dɾank in lonɡ ɡɾeedi swaʝows.

"i ɾead someweɾe tat te sun's xettinɡ otteɾ ebeɾi ieaɾ," said tom
xenjaʝi. "it seems tat pɾetti soon te eaɾt's ɡoinɡ to faʝ into te
sun--oɾ wait a minute--it's xust te opposite--te sun's xettinɡ koldeɾ
ebeɾi ieaɾ.

"kome outside," e suɡxested to ɡatsbi, "i'd like iou to abe a look at
te plase."

i went wit tem out to te beɾanda. on te ɡɾeen sound, staɡnant in te
eat, one smaʝ sail kɾawled slowli towaɾd te fɾeʃeɾ sea. ɡatsbi's eies
foʝowed it momentaɾili; e ɾaised ʝs and and pointed akɾoss te bai.

"i'm ɾiɡt akɾoss fɾom iou."

"so iou aɾe."

ouɾ eies lifted obeɾ te ɾosebeds and te ot lawn and te weedi ɾefuse
of te doɡ dais alonɡ ʃoɾe. slowli te wʝte winɡs of te boat mobed
aɡainst te blwe kool limit of te ski. aead lai te skaʝoped osean and
te aboundinɡ blessed isles.

"teɾe's spoɾt foɾ iou," said tom, noddinɡ. "i'd like to be out teɾe
wit ʝm foɾ about an ouɾ."

we ad lunt͡ʃeon in te dininɡ-ɾoom, daɾkened, too, aɡainst te eat,
and dɾank down neɾbous ɡaieti wit te kold ale.

"wat'ʝ we do wit ouɾselbes tʝs afteɾnoon," kɾjed daisi, "and te
dai afteɾ tat, and te nekst tʝɾti ieaɾs?"

"don't be moɾbid," xoɾdan said. "life staɾts aʝ obeɾ aɡain wen it xets
kɾisp in te faʝ."

"but it's so ot," insisted daisi, on te beɾxe of teaɾs, "and
ebeɾitʝnɡ's so konfused. let's aʝ ɡo to town!"

eɾ boise stɾuɡɡled on tɾouɡ te eat, beatinɡ aɡainst it, mouldinɡ its
senselessness into foɾms.

"i'be eaɾd of makinɡ a ɡaɾaxe out of a stable," tom was saiinɡ to
ɡatsbi, "but i'm te fiɾst man wo ebeɾ made a stable out of a ɡaɾaxe."

"wo wants to ɡo to town?" demanded daisi insistent͡ɬi. ɡatsbi's eies
floated towaɾd eɾ. "a," ʃe kɾjed, "iou look so kool."

teiɾ eies met, and tei staɾed toxeteɾ at eat͡ʃ oteɾ, alone in spase.
wit an effoɾt ʃe ɡlansed down at te table.

"iou alwais look so kool," ʃe ɾepeated.

ʃe ad told ʝm tat ʃe lobed ʝm, and tom but͡ʃanan saw. e was
astounded. ʝs mout opened a litt͡ɬe and e looked at ɡatsbi and ten
bakk at daisi as if e ad xust ɾekoɡnised eɾ as some one e knew a
lonɡ time aɡo.

"iou ɾesemble te adbeɾtisement of te man," ʃe went on innosent͡ɬi.
"iou know te adbeɾtisement of te man----"

"aʝ ɾiɡt," bɾoke in tom kikkli, "i'm peɾfekt͡ɬi wiʝinɡ to ɡo to
town. kome on--we'ɾe aʝ ɡoinɡ to town."

e ɡot up, ʝs eies stiʝ flaʃinɡ between ɡatsbi and ʝs wife.
no one mobed.

"kome on!" ʝs tempeɾ kɾakked a litt͡ɬe. "wat's te matteɾ, aniow?
if we'ɾe ɡoinɡ to town let's staɾt."

ʝs and, tɾemblinɡ wit ʝs effoɾt at self kontɾol, boɾe to ʝs lips te
last of ʝs ɡlass of ale. daisi's boise ɡot us to ouɾ feet and out on
to te blasinɡ ɡɾabel dɾibe.

"aɾe we xust ɡoinɡ to ɡo?" ʃe obxekted. "like tʝs? aɾen't we ɡoinɡ to
let ani one smoke a siɡaɾette fiɾst?"

"ebeɾibodi smoked aʝ tɾouɡ lunt͡ʃ."

"o, let's abe fun," ʃe beɡxed ʝm. "it's too ot to fuss."

e didn't answeɾ.

"abe it iouɾ own wai," ʃe said. "kome on, xoɾdan."

tei went upstaiɾs to xet ɾeadi wʝle we tɾee men stood teɾe ʃufflinɡ
te ot pebbles wit ouɾ feet. a silbeɾ kuɾbe of te moon obeɾed alɾeadi
in te westeɾn ski. ɡatsbi staɾted to speak, t͡ʃanxed ʝs mind, but not
befoɾe tom weeled and fased ʝm ekspektant͡ɬi.

"abe iou ɡot iouɾ stables eɾe?" asked ɡatsbi wit an effoɾt.

"about a kaɾteɾ of a mile down te ɾoad."

"o."

a pause.

"i don't see te idea of ɡoinɡ to town," bɾoke out tom sabaxeli.
"women xet tese notjons in teiɾ eads----"

"ʃaʝ we take anitʝnɡ to dɾink?" kaʝed daisi fɾom an uppeɾ window.

"i'ʝ xet some wʝskei," answeɾed tom. e went inside.

ɡatsbi tuɾned to me ɾixidli:

"i kan't sai anitʝnɡ in ʝs ouse, old spoɾt."

"ʃe's ɡot an indiskɾeet boise," i ɾemaɾked. "it's fuʝ of----"

i esitated.

"eɾ boise is fuʝ of monei," e said suddenli.

tat was it. i'd nebeɾ undeɾstood befoɾe. it was fuʝ of monei--tat was
te ineksaustible t͡ʃaɾm tat ɾose and feʝ in it, te xinɡle of it, te
kimbals' sonɡ of it. . . . ʝɡ in a wʝte palase te kinɡ's dauɡteɾ,
te ɡolden xiɾl. . . .

tom kame out of te ouse wɾappinɡ a kaɾt bott͡ɬe in a towel, foʝowed
bi daisi and xoɾdan weaɾinɡ smaʝ tiɡt ats of metaʝik klot and
kariinɡ liɡt kapes obeɾ teiɾ aɾms.

"ʃaʝ we aʝ ɡo in mi kaɾ?" suɡxested ɡatsbi. e felt te ot, ɡɾeen
leateɾ of te seat. "i ouɡt to abe left it in te ʃade."

"is it standaɾd ʃift?" demanded tom.

"ies."

"weʝ, iou take mi koupe and let me dɾibe iouɾ kaɾ to town."

te suɡxestjon was distasteful to ɡatsbi.

"i don't tʝnk teɾe's mut͡ʃ ɡas," e obxekted.

"plenti of ɡas," said tom boisteɾousli. e looked at te ɡauxe.
"and if it ɾuns out i kan stop at a dɾuɡ stoɾe. iou kan bui anitʝnɡ at a
dɾuɡ stoɾe nowadais."

a pause foʝowed tʝs appaɾent͡ɬi point͡ɬess ɾemaɾk. daisi looked at tom
fɾowninɡ and an indefinable ekspɾessjon, at onse definiteli unfamiljaɾ
and baɡeli ɾekoɡnisable, as if i ad onli eaɾd it deskɾibed in woɾds,
passed obeɾ ɡatsbi's fase.

"kome on, daisi," said tom, pɾessinɡ eɾ wit ʝs and towaɾd ɡatsbi's
kaɾ. "i'ʝ take iou in tʝs siɾkus waɡon."

e opened te dooɾ but ʃe mobed out fɾom te siɾkle of ʝs aɾm.

"iou take nikk and xoɾdan. we'ʝ foʝow iou in te koupe."

ʃe walked klose to ɡatsbi, tout͡ʃinɡ ʝs koat wit eɾ and. xoɾdan and
tom and i ɡot into te fɾont seat of ɡatsbi's kaɾ, tom puʃed te
unfamiljaɾ xeaɾs tentatibeli and we ʃot off into te oppɾessibe eat
leabinɡ tem out of siɡt beʝnd.

"did iou see tat?" demanded tom.

"see wat?"

e looked at me keenli, ɾealisinɡ tat xoɾdan and i must abe known aʝ
alonɡ.

"iou tʝnk i'm pɾetti dumb, don't iou?" e suɡxested. "peɾaps i am, but
i abe a--almost a sekond siɡt, sometimes, tat teʝs me wat to do.
maibe iou don't beljebe tat, but ssiense----"

e paused. te immedjate kontinxenki obeɾtook ʝm, puʝed ʝm bakk fɾom
te edxe of te teoɾetikal abiss.

"i'be made a smaʝ inbestiɡatjon of tʝs feʝow," e kontinwed. "i kould
abe ɡone deepeɾ if i'd known----"

"do iou mean iou'be been to a medjum?" inkiɾed xoɾdan wmoɾousli.

"wat?" konfused, e staɾed at us as we lauɡed. "a medjum?"

"about ɡatsbi."

"about ɡatsbi! no, i aben't. i said i'd been makinɡ a smaʝ
inbestiɡatjon of ʝs past."

"and iou found e was an oksfoɾd man," said xoɾdan elpfuʝi.

"an oksfoɾd man!" e was inkɾedulous. "like eʝ e is! e weaɾs a
pink swit."

"nebeɾteless e's an oksfoɾd man."

"oksfoɾd, new meksiko," snoɾted tom kontemptwousli, "oɾ sometʝnɡ like
tat."

"listen, tom. if iou'ɾe sut͡ʃ a snob, wi did iou inbite ʝm to lunt͡ʃ?"
demanded xoɾdan kɾossli.

"daisi inbited ʝm; ʃe knew ʝm befoɾe we weɾe marjed--ɡod knows
weɾe!"

we weɾe aʝ iritable now wit te fadinɡ ale and, awaɾe of it,
we dɾobe foɾ a wʝle in silense. ten as doktoɾ t. x. ekklebuɾɡ's faded
eies kame into siɡt down te ɾoad, i ɾemembeɾed ɡatsbi's kautjon about
ɡasoline.

"we'be ɡot enouɡ to xet us to town," said tom.

"but teɾe's a ɡaɾaxe ɾiɡt eɾe," obxekted xoɾdan. "i don't want to xet
staʝed in tʝs bakinɡ eat."

tom tɾew on bot bɾakes impatjent͡ɬi and we slid to an abɾupt
dusti stop undeɾ wilson's siɡn. afteɾ a moment te pɾopɾjetoɾ emeɾxed
fɾom te inteɾjoɾ of ʝs establiʃment and ɡased oʝow-eied at te kaɾ.

"let's abe some ɡas!" kɾjed tom ɾouɡli. "wat do iou tʝnk we stopped
foɾ--to admiɾe te bjew?"

"i'm sikk," said wilson witout mobinɡ. "i been sikk aʝ dai."

"wat's te matteɾ?"

"i'm aʝ ɾun down."

"weʝ, ʃaʝ i elp miself?" tom demanded. "iou sounded weʝ enouɡ
on te pone."

wit an effoɾt wilson left te ʃade and suppoɾt of te dooɾwai and,
bɾeatʝnɡ aɾd, unskɾewed te kap of te tank. in te sunliɡt ʝs fase
was ɡɾeen.

"i didn't mean to interupt iouɾ lunt͡ʃ," e said. "but i need monei
pɾetti bad and i was wondeɾinɡ wat iou weɾe ɡoinɡ to do wit iouɾ
old kaɾ."

"ow do iou like tʝs one?" inkiɾed tom. "i bouɡt it last week."

"it's a nise ieʝow one," said wilson, as e stɾained at te andle.

"like to bui it?"

"biɡ t͡ʃanse," wilson smiled faint͡ɬi. "no, but i kould make some monei
on te oteɾ."

"wat do iou want monei foɾ, aʝ of a sudden?"

"i'be been eɾe too lonɡ. i want to xet awai. mi wife and i want to
ɡo west."

"iouɾ wife does!" eksklaimed tom, staɾt͡ɬed.

"ʃe's been talkinɡ about it foɾ ten ieaɾs." e ɾested foɾ a moment
aɡainst te pump, ʃadinɡ ʝs eies. "and now ʃe's ɡoinɡ weteɾ ʃe wants
to oɾ not. i'm ɡoinɡ to xet eɾ awai."

te koupe flaʃed bi us wit a fluri of dust and te flaʃ of a
wabinɡ and.

"wat do i owe iou?" demanded tom aɾʃli.

"i xust ɡot wised up to sometʝnɡ funni te last two dais," ɾemaɾked
wilson. "tat's wi i want to xet awai. tat's wi i been boteɾinɡ iou
about te kaɾ."

"wat do i owe iou?"

"doʝaɾ twenti."

te ɾelent͡ɬess beatinɡ eat was bexinninɡ to konfuse me and i ad
a bad moment teɾe befoɾe i ɾealised tat so faɾ ʝs suspisions
adn't aliɡted on tom. e ad diskobeɾed tat miɾt͡ɬe ad some
soɾt of life apaɾt fɾom ʝm in anoteɾ woɾld and te ʃokk ad
made ʝm pisikaʝi sikk. i staɾed at ʝm and ten at tom, wo ad made
a paɾaʝel diskobeɾi less tan an ouɾ befoɾe--and it okkured to me
tat teɾe was no diffeɾense between men, in inteʝixense oɾ ɾase, so
pɾofound as te diffeɾense between te sikk and te weʝ. wilson was so
sikk tat e looked ɡilti, unfoɾxibabli ɡilti--as if e ad xust ɡot
some pooɾ xiɾl wit t͡ʃild.

"i'ʝ let iou abe tat kaɾ," said tom. "i'ʝ send it obeɾ tomorow
afteɾnoon."

tat lokaliti was alwais baɡeli diskjetinɡ, eben in te bɾoad
ɡlaɾe of afteɾnoon, and now i tuɾned mi ead as touɡ i ad been
waɾned of sometʝnɡ beʝnd. obeɾ te aʃeaps te xiant eies of
doktoɾ t. x. ekklebuɾɡ kept teiɾ bixil but i peɾseibed, afteɾ
a moment, tat oteɾ eies weɾe ɾeɡaɾdinɡ us wit pekuljaɾ intensiti
fɾom less tan twenti feet awai.

in one of te windows obeɾ te ɡaɾaxe te kuɾtains ad been mobed aside
a litt͡ɬe and miɾt͡ɬe wilson was peeɾinɡ down at te kaɾ. so enɡɾossed
was ʃe tat ʃe ad no konssiousness of beinɡ obseɾbed and one
emotjon afteɾ anoteɾ kɾept into eɾ fase like obxekts into a slowli
debelopinɡ piktuɾe. eɾ ekspɾessjon was kuɾjousli familjaɾ--it was an
ekspɾessjon i ad often seen on women's fases but on miɾt͡ɬe wilson's
fase it seemed puɾposeless and ineksplikable until i ɾealised tat eɾ
eies, wide wit xealous teroɾ, weɾe fiksed not on tom, but on xoɾdan
bakeɾ, wom ʃe took to be ʝs wife.


teɾe is no konfusjon like te konfusjon of a simple mind, and as we
dɾobe awai tom was feelinɡ te ot wʝps of panik. ʝs wife and ʝs
mistɾess, until an ouɾ aɡo sekuɾe and inbjolate, weɾe slippinɡ
pɾesipitateli fɾom ʝs kontɾol. instinkt made ʝm step on te
akseleɾatoɾ wit te double puɾpose of obeɾtakinɡ daisi and leabinɡ
wilson beʝnd, and we sped alonɡ towaɾd astoɾja at fifti miles an ouɾ,
until, amonɡ te spideɾi xiɾdeɾs of te elebated, we kame in siɡt of
te easiɡoinɡ blwe koupe.

"tose biɡ mobjes aɾound fiftjet stɾeet aɾe kool," suɡxested xoɾdan.
"i lobe new ioɾk on summeɾ afteɾnoons wen ebeɾi one's awai. teɾe's
sometʝnɡ beɾi senswous about it--oberipe, as if aʝ soɾts of funni
fɾwits weɾe ɡoinɡ to faʝ into iouɾ ands."

te woɾd "senswous" ad te effekt of fuɾteɾ diskjetinɡ tom but befoɾe
e kould inbent a pɾotest te koupe kame to a stop and daisi siɡnaʝed us
to dɾaw up alonɡside.

"weɾe aɾe we ɡoinɡ?" ʃe kɾjed.

"ow about te mobjes?"

"it's so ot," ʃe komplained. "iou ɡo. we'ʝ ɾide aɾound and meet iou
afteɾ." wit an effoɾt eɾ wit ɾose faint͡ɬi, "we'ʝ meet iou on some
koɾneɾ. i'ʝ be te man smokinɡ two siɡaɾettes."

"we kan't aɾɡe about it eɾe," tom said impatjent͡ɬi as a tɾukk ɡabe
out a kuɾsinɡ wʝst͡ɬe beʝnd us. "iou foʝow me to te sout side of
sentɾal paɾk, in fɾont of te plasa."

sebeɾal times e tuɾned ʝs ead and looked bakk foɾ teiɾ kaɾ,
and if te tɾaffik delaied tem e slowed up until tei kame into
siɡt. i tʝnk e was afɾaid tei would daɾt down a side stɾeet and out
of ʝs life foɾebeɾ.

but tei didn't. and we aʝ took te less eksplikable step of enɡaxinɡ
te paɾloɾ of a swite in te plasa otel.

te pɾolonxed and tumultwous aɾɡwment tat ended bi eɾdinɡ us into
tat ɾoom eludes me, touɡ i abe a ʃaɾp pisikal memoɾi tat, in te
kouɾse of it, mi undeɾweaɾ kept klimbinɡ like a damp snake aɾound mi
leɡs and inteɾmittent beads of sweat ɾased kool akɾoss mi bakk. te
notjon oɾixinated wit daisi's suɡxestjon tat we ʝɾe fibe batɾooms
and take kold bats, and ten assumed moɾe tanxible foɾm as "a plase to
abe a mint xulep." eat͡ʃ of us said obeɾ and obeɾ tat it was a "kɾasi
idea"--we aʝ talked at onse to a baffled kleɾk and touɡt, oɾ
pɾetended to tʝnk, tat we weɾe beinɡ beɾi funni. . . .

te ɾoom was laɾxe and stiflinɡ, and, touɡ it was alɾeadi fouɾ
o'klokk, openinɡ te windows admitted onli a ɡwst of ot ʃɾubbeɾi fɾom
te paɾk. daisi went to te miroɾ and stood wit eɾ bakk to us,
fiksinɡ eɾ aiɾ.

"it's a sweʝ swite," wʝspeɾed xoɾdan ɾespektfuʝi and ebeɾi one
lauɡed.

"open anoteɾ window," kommanded daisi, witout tuɾninɡ aɾound.

"teɾe aɾen't ani moɾe."

"weʝ, we'd betteɾ telepone foɾ an akse----"

"te tʝnɡ to do is to foɾxet about te eat," said tom impatjent͡ɬi.
"iou make it ten times woɾse bi kɾabbinɡ about it."

e unɾoʝed te bott͡ɬe of wʝskei fɾom te towel and put it on te table.

"wi not let eɾ alone, old spoɾt?" ɾemaɾked ɡatsbi. "iou'ɾe te one tat
wanted to kome to town."

teɾe was a moment of silense. te telepone book slipped fɾom its nail
and splaʃed to te flooɾ, weɾeupon xoɾdan wʝspeɾed "ekskuse me"--but
tʝs time no one lauɡed.

"i'ʝ pikk it up," i offeɾed.

"i'be ɡot it." ɡatsbi eksamined te paɾted stɾinɡ, mutteɾed "wm!" in an
inteɾested wai, and tossed te book on a t͡ʃaiɾ.

"tat's a ɡɾeat ekspɾessjon of iouɾs, isn't it?" said tom ʃaɾpli.

"wat is?"

"aʝ tʝs 'old spoɾt' business. weɾe'd iou pikk tat up?"

"now see eɾe, tom," said daisi, tuɾninɡ aɾound fɾom te miroɾ, "if
iou'ɾe ɡoinɡ to make peɾsonal ɾemaɾks i won't stai eɾe a minute. kaʝ
up and oɾdeɾ some ise foɾ te mint xulep."

as tom took up te ɾeseibeɾ te kompɾessed eat eksploded into sound and
we weɾe listeninɡ to te poɾtentous t͡ʃoɾds of mendelsson's weddinɡ maɾt͡ʃ
fɾom te baʝɾoom below.

"imaxine mariinɡ anibodi in tʝs eat!" kɾjed xoɾdan dismaʝi.

"stiʝ--i was marjed in te middle of xune," daisi ɾemembeɾed,
"lowisbiʝe in xune! somebodi fainted. wo was it fainted, tom?"

"biloksi," e answeɾed ʃoɾt͡ɬi.

"a man named biloksi. 'blokks' biloksi, and e made bokses--tat's a
fakt--and e was fɾom biloksi, tennessee."

"tei karjed ʝm into mi ouse," appended xoɾdan, "bekause we libed
xust two dooɾs fɾom te t͡ʃuɾt͡ʃ. and e staied tɾee weeks, until daddi
told ʝm e ad to xet out. te dai afteɾ e left daddi djed." afteɾ a
moment ʃe added as if ʃe miɡt abe sounded irebeɾent, "teɾe
wasn't ani konnektjon."

"i used to know a biʝ biloksi fɾom mempʝs," i ɾemaɾked.

"tat was ʝs kousin. i knew ʝs wole famili ʝstoɾi befoɾe e left.
e ɡabe me an aluminum putteɾ tat i use todai."

te musik ad djed down as te seɾemoni beɡan and now a lonɡ t͡ʃeeɾ floated
in at te window, foʝowed bi inteɾmittent kɾjes of "iea--ea--ea!"
and finaʝi bi a buɾst of xass as te dansinɡ beɡan.

"we'ɾe xettinɡ old," said daisi. "if we weɾe iounɡ we'd ɾise and danse."

"ɾemembeɾ biloksi," xoɾdan waɾned eɾ. "weɾe'd iou know ʝm, tom?"

"biloksi?" e konsentɾated wit an effoɾt. "i didn't know ʝm. e was a
fɾjend of daisi's."

"e was not," ʃe denjed. "i'd nebeɾ seen ʝm befoɾe. e kame down in
te pɾibate kaɾ."

"weʝ, e said e knew iou. e said e was ɾaised in lowisbiʝe.
asa biɾd bɾouɡt ʝm aɾound at te last minute and asked if we ad ɾoom
foɾ ʝm."

xoɾdan smiled.

"e was pɾobabli bumminɡ ʝs wai ome. e told me e was pɾesident of
iouɾ klass at iale."

tom and i looked at eat͡ʃ oteɾ blankli.

"biloksi?"

"fiɾst plase, we didn't abe ani pɾesident----"

ɡatsbi's foot beat a ʃoɾt, ɾest͡ɬess tattoo and tom eied ʝm suddenli.

"bi te wai, mɾ. ɡatsbi, i undeɾstand iou'ɾe an oksfoɾd man."

"not eksakt͡ɬi."

"o, ies, i undeɾstand iou went to oksfoɾd."

"ies--i went teɾe."

a pause. ten tom's boise, inkɾedulous and insultinɡ:

"iou must abe ɡone teɾe about te time biloksi went to new aben."

anoteɾ pause. a waiteɾ knokked and kame in wit kɾuʃed mint and ise but
te silense was unbɾoken bi ʝs "tank iou" and te soft klosinɡ of te
dooɾ. tʝs tɾemendous detail was to be kleaɾed up at last.

"i told iou i went teɾe," said ɡatsbi.

"i eaɾd iou, but i'd like to know wen."

"it was in nineteen-nineteen, i onli staied fibe monts. tat's wi i
kan't ɾeaʝi kaʝ miself an oksfoɾd man."

tom ɡlansed aɾound to see if we miroɾed ʝs unbeljef. but we weɾe aʝ
lookinɡ at ɡatsbi.

"it was an oppoɾtuniti tei ɡabe to some of te offiseɾs afteɾ te
aɾmistise," e kontinwed. "we kould ɡo to ani of te unibeɾsitjes in
enɡland oɾ fɾanse."

i wanted to xet up and slap ʝm on te bakk. i ad one of tose ɾenewals
of komplete fait in ʝm tat i'd ekspeɾjensed befoɾe.

daisi ɾose, smilinɡ faint͡ɬi, and went to te table.

"open te wʝskei, tom," ʃe oɾdeɾed. "and i'ʝ make iou a mint xulep.
ten iou won't seem so stupid to iouɾself. . . . look at te mint!"

"wait a minute," snapped tom, "i want to ask mɾ. ɡatsbi one moɾe
kestjon."

"ɡo on," ɡatsbi said politeli.

"wat kind of a ɾow aɾe iou tɾiinɡ to kause in mi ouse aniow?"

tei weɾe out in te open at last and ɡatsbi was kontent.

"e isn't kausinɡ a ɾow." daisi looked despeɾateli fɾom one to te
oteɾ. "iou'ɾe kausinɡ a ɾow. please abe a litt͡ɬe self kontɾol."

"self kontɾol!" ɾepeated tom inkɾedulousli. "i suppose te latest tʝnɡ
is to sit bakk and let mɾ. nobodi fɾom noweɾe make lobe to iouɾ wife.
weʝ, if tat's te idea iou kan kount me out. . . . nowadais people bexin
bi sneeɾinɡ at famili life and famili institutjons and nekst tei'ʝ
tɾow ebeɾitʝnɡ obeɾboaɾd and abe inteɾmarjaxe between blakk
and wʝte."

fluʃed wit ʝs impassjoned xibbeɾiʃ e saw ʝmself standinɡ alone on
te last barjeɾ of sibilisatjon.

"we'ɾe aʝ wʝte eɾe," muɾmuɾed xoɾdan.

"i know i'm not beɾi populaɾ. i don't xibe biɡ paɾtjes. i suppose
iou'be ɡot to make iouɾ ouse into a piɡsti in oɾdeɾ to abe ani
fɾjends--in te modeɾn woɾld."

anɡɾi as i was, as we aʝ weɾe, i was tempted to lauɡ wenebeɾ e opened
ʝs mout. te tɾansitjon fɾom libeɾtine to pɾiɡ was so komplete.

"i'be ɡot sometʝnɡ to teʝ iou, old spoɾt,----" beɡan ɡatsbi. but daisi
ɡessed at ʝs intentjon.

"please don't!" ʃe interupted elplessli. "please let's aʝ ɡo ome.
wi don't we aʝ ɡo ome?"

"tat's a ɡood idea." i ɡot up. "kome on, tom. nobodi wants a dɾink."

"i want to know wat mɾ. ɡatsbi as to teʝ me."

"iouɾ wife doesn't lobe iou," said ɡatsbi. "ʃe's nebeɾ lobed iou.
ʃe lobes me."

"iou must be kɾasi!" eksklaimed tom automatikaʝi.

ɡatsbi spɾanɡ to ʝs feet, bibid wit ekssitement.

"ʃe nebeɾ lobed iou, do iou eaɾ?" e kɾjed. "ʃe onli marjed iou
bekause i was pooɾ and ʃe was tiɾed of waitinɡ foɾ me. it was a terible
mistake, but in eɾ eaɾt ʃe nebeɾ lobed ani one ekssept me!"

at tʝs point xoɾdan and i tɾjed to ɡo but tom and ɡatsbi insisted wit
kompetitibe fiɾmness tat we ɾemain--as touɡ neiteɾ of tem ad
anitʝnɡ to konseal and it would be a pɾibilexe to paɾtake bikaɾjousli
of teiɾ emotjons.

"sit down daisi." tom's boise ɡɾoped unsuksessfuʝi foɾ te pateɾnal
note. "wat's been ɡoinɡ on? i want to eaɾ aʝ about it."

"i told iou wat's been ɡoinɡ on," said ɡatsbi. "ɡoinɡ on foɾ fibe
ieaɾs--and iou didn't know."

tom tuɾned to daisi ʃaɾpli.

"iou'be been seeinɡ tʝs feʝow foɾ fibe ieaɾs?"

"not seeinɡ," said ɡatsbi. "no, we kouldn't meet. but bot of us lobed
eat͡ʃ oteɾ aʝ tat time, old spoɾt, and iou didn't know. i used to lauɡ
sometimes--"but teɾe was no lauɡteɾ in ʝs eies, "to tʝnk tat iou
didn't know."

"o--tat's aʝ." tom tapped ʝs tʝkk finxeɾs toxeteɾ like a kleɾɡiman
and leaned bakk in ʝs t͡ʃaiɾ.

"iou'ɾe kɾasi!" e eksploded. "i kan't speak about wat appened fibe ieaɾs
aɡo, bekause i didn't know daisi ten--and i'ʝ be damned if i see ow iou
ɡot witʝn a mile of eɾ unless iou bɾouɡt te ɡɾoseɾjes to te bakk
dooɾ. but aʝ te ɾest of tat's a ɡod damned lje. daisi lobed me wen
ʃe marjed me and ʃe lobes me now."

"no," said ɡatsbi, ʃakinɡ ʝs ead.

"ʃe does, touɡ. te tɾouble is tat sometimes ʃe xets fooliʃ ideas
in eɾ ead and doesn't know wat ʃe's doinɡ." e nodded saxeli. "and
wat's moɾe, i lobe daisi too. onse in a wʝle i ɡo off on a spɾee
and make a fool of miself, but i alwais kome bakk, and in mi eaɾt i
lobe eɾ aʝ te time."

"iou'ɾe ɾeboltinɡ," said daisi. ʃe tuɾned to me, and eɾ boise,
dɾoppinɡ an oktabe loweɾ, fiʝed te ɾoom wit tɾiʝinɡ skoɾn: "do iou
know wi we left t͡ʃikaɡo? i'm suɾpɾised tat tei didn't tɾeat iou to
te stoɾi of tat litt͡ɬe spɾee."

ɡatsbi walked obeɾ and stood beside eɾ.

"daisi, tat's aʝ obeɾ now," e said eaɾnest͡ɬi. "it doesn't matteɾ ani
moɾe. xust teʝ ʝm te tɾut--tat iou nebeɾ lobed ʝm--and it's aʝ
wiped out foɾebeɾ."

ʃe looked at ʝm blindli. "wi,--ow kould i lobe ʝm--possibli?"

"iou nebeɾ lobed ʝm."

ʃe esitated. eɾ eies feʝ on xoɾdan and me wit a soɾt of appeal,
as touɡ ʃe ɾealised at last wat ʃe was doinɡ--and as touɡ ʃe ad
nebeɾ, aʝ alonɡ, intended doinɡ anitʝnɡ at aʝ. but it was done now.
it was too late.

"i nebeɾ lobed ʝm," ʃe said, wit peɾseptible ɾeluktanse.

"not at kapjolani?" demanded tom suddenli.

"no."

fɾom te baʝɾoom beneat, muffled and suffokatinɡ t͡ʃoɾds weɾe dɾiftinɡ up
on ot wabes of aiɾ.

"not tat dai i karjed iou down fɾom te punt͡ʃ bowl to keep iouɾ ʃoes
dɾi?" teɾe was a wski tendeɾness in ʝs tone. ". . . daisi?"

"please don't." eɾ boise was kold, but te ɾankouɾ was ɡone fɾom it.
ʃe looked at ɡatsbi. "teɾe, xai," ʃe said--but eɾ and as ʃe tɾjed
to liɡt a siɡaɾette was tɾemblinɡ. suddenli ʃe tɾew te siɡaɾette and
te buɾninɡ matt͡ʃ on te kaɾpet.

"o, iou want too mut͡ʃ!" ʃe kɾjed to ɡatsbi. "i lobe iou now--isn't tat
enouɡ? i kan't elp wat's past." ʃe beɡan to sob elplessli.
"i did lobe ʝm onse--but i lobed iou too."

ɡatsbi's eies opened and klosed.

"iou lobed me too?" e ɾepeated.

"eben tat's a lje," said tom sabaxeli. "ʃe didn't know iou weɾe alibe.
wi,--teɾe'ɾe tʝnɡs between daisi and me tat iou'ʝ nebeɾ know,
tʝnɡs tat neiteɾ of us kan ebeɾ foɾxet."

te woɾds seemed to bite pisikaʝi into ɡatsbi.

"i want to speak to daisi alone," e insisted. "ʃe's aʝ ekssited now----"

"eben alone i kan't sai i nebeɾ lobed tom," ʃe admitted in a pitiful
boise. "it wouldn't be tɾwe."

"of kouɾse it wouldn't," aɡɾeed tom.

ʃe tuɾned to eɾ wsband.

"as if it matteɾed to iou," ʃe said.

"of kouɾse it matteɾs. i'm ɡoinɡ to take betteɾ kaɾe of iou fɾom now on."

"iou don't undeɾstand," said ɡatsbi, wit a tout͡ʃ of panik. "iou'ɾe not
ɡoinɡ to take kaɾe of eɾ ani moɾe."

"i'm not?" tom opened ʝs eies wide and lauɡed. e kould affoɾd to
kontɾol ʝmself now. "wi's tat?"

"daisi's leabinɡ iou."

"nonsense."

"i am, touɡ," ʃe said wit a bisible effoɾt.

"ʃe's not leabinɡ me!" tom's woɾds suddenli leaned down obeɾ ɡatsbi.
"seɾtainli not foɾ a kommon swindleɾ wo'd abe to steal te ɾinɡ e
put on eɾ finxeɾ."

"i won't stand tʝs!" kɾjed daisi. "o, please let's xet out."

"wo aɾe iou, aniow?" bɾoke out tom. "iou'ɾe one of tat bunt͡ʃ tat
anɡs aɾound wit meieɾ wolfʃjem--tat mut͡ʃ i appen to know. i'be made
a litt͡ɬe inbestiɡatjon into iouɾ affaiɾs--and i'ʝ kari it fuɾteɾ
tomorow."

"iou kan swit iouɾself about tat, old spoɾt." said ɡatsbi steadili.

"i found out wat iouɾ 'dɾuɡ stoɾes' weɾe." e tuɾned to us and spoke
ɾapidli. "e and tʝs wolfʃjem bouɡt up a lot of side-stɾeet dɾuɡ stoɾes
eɾe and in t͡ʃikaɡo and sold ɡɾain alkool obeɾ te kounteɾ. tat's one of
ʝs litt͡ɬe stunts. i pikked ʝm foɾ a boot͡ɬeɡxeɾ te fiɾst time i saw
ʝm and i wasn't faɾ wɾonɡ."

"wat about it?" said ɡatsbi politeli. "i ɡess iouɾ fɾjend walteɾ t͡ʃase
wasn't too pɾoud to kome in on it."

"and iou left ʝm in te luɾt͡ʃ, didn't iou? iou let ʝm ɡo to xail foɾ
a mont obeɾ in new xeɾsei. ɡod! iou ouɡt to eaɾ walteɾ on te subxekt
of iou."

"e kame to us dead bɾoke. e was beɾi ɡlad to pikk up some monei, old
spoɾt."

"don't iou kaʝ me 'old spoɾt'!" kɾjed tom. ɡatsbi said notʝnɡ.
"walteɾ kould abe iou up on te bettinɡ laws too, but wolfʃjem skaɾed
ʝm into ʃuttinɡ ʝs mout."

tat unfamiljaɾ iet ɾekoɡnisable look was bakk aɡain in ɡatsbi's fase.

"tat dɾuɡ stoɾe business was xust smaʝ t͡ʃanxe," kontinwed tom slowli,
"but iou'be ɡot sometʝnɡ on now tat walteɾ's afɾaid to teʝ me
about."

i ɡlansed at daisi wo was staɾinɡ terifjed between ɡatsbi
and eɾ wsband and at xoɾdan wo ad beɡwn to balanse an inbisible
but absoɾbinɡ obxekt on te tip of eɾ t͡ʃin. ten i tuɾned bakk to
ɡatsbi--and was staɾt͡ɬed at ʝs ekspɾessjon. e looked--and tʝs is said
in aʝ kontempt foɾ te babbled slandeɾ of ʝs ɡaɾden--as if e ad
"kiʝed a man." foɾ a moment te set of ʝs fase kould be deskɾibed in
xust tat fantastik wai.

it passed, and e beɡan to talk ekssitedli to daisi, deniinɡ ebeɾitʝnɡ,
defendinɡ ʝs name aɡainst akkusatjons tat ad not been made. but wit
ebeɾi woɾd ʃe was dɾawinɡ fuɾteɾ and fuɾteɾ into eɾself, so e ɡabe
tat up and onli te dead dɾeam fouɡt on as te afteɾnoon slipped
awai, tɾiinɡ to tout͡ʃ wat was no lonxeɾ tanxible, stɾuɡɡlinɡ
unappili, undespaiɾinɡli, towaɾd tat lost boise akɾoss te ɾoom.

te boise beɡxed aɡain to ɡo.

"please, tom! i kan't stand tʝs ani moɾe."

eɾ fɾiɡtened eies told tat watebeɾ intentjons, watebeɾ kouɾaxe
ʃe ad ad, weɾe definiteli ɡone.

"iou two staɾt on ome, daisi," said tom. "in mɾ. ɡatsbi's kaɾ."

ʃe looked at tom, alaɾmed now, but e insisted wit maɡnanimous skoɾn.

"ɡo on. e won't annoi iou. i tʝnk e ɾealises tat ʝs pɾesumptwous
litt͡ɬe fliɾtatjon is obeɾ."

tei weɾe ɡone, witout a woɾd, snapped out, made aksidental, isolated,
like ɡosts eben fɾom ouɾ piti.

afteɾ a moment tom ɡot up and beɡan wɾappinɡ te unopened bott͡ɬe of
wʝskei in te towel.

"want ani of tʝs stuff? xoɾdan? . . . nikk?"

i didn't answeɾ.

"nikk?" e asked aɡain.

"wat?"

"want ani?"

"no . . . i xust ɾemembeɾed tat todai's mi biɾtdai."

i was tʝɾti. befoɾe me stɾett͡ʃed te poɾtentous menasinɡ ɾoad of a
new dekade.

it was seben o'klokk wen we ɡot into te koupe wit ʝm and staɾted
foɾ lonɡ island. tom talked insessant͡ɬi, eksultinɡ and lauɡʝnɡ, but ʝs
boise was as ɾemote fɾom xoɾdan and me as te foɾeiɡn klamoɾ on te
sidewalk oɾ te tumult of te elebated obeɾead. wman simpati
as its limits and we weɾe kontent to let aʝ teiɾ tɾaxik aɾɡwments
fade wit te siti liɡts beʝnd. tʝɾti--te pɾomise of a dekade
of loneliness, a tʝnninɡ list of sinɡle men to know, a tʝnninɡ
bɾjef-kase of entwsjasm, tʝnninɡ aiɾ. but teɾe was xoɾdan beside
me wo, unlike daisi, was too wise ebeɾ to kari weʝ-foɾɡotten
dɾeams fɾom axe to axe. as we passed obeɾ te daɾk bɾidxe eɾ wan fase
feʝ lasili aɡainst mi koat's ʃouldeɾ and te foɾmidable stɾoke of
tʝɾti djed awai wit te ɾeassuɾinɡ pɾessuɾe of eɾ and.

so we dɾobe on towaɾd deat tɾouɡ te koolinɡ twiliɡt.


te iounɡ ɡɾeek, mit͡ʃaelis, wo ɾan te koffee xoint beside te
aʃeaps was te pɾinsipal witness at te inkest. e ad slept tɾouɡ
te eat until afteɾ fibe, wen e stɾoʝed obeɾ to te ɡaɾaxe and
found xeoɾxe wilson sikk in ʝs offise--ɾeaʝi sikk, pale as ʝs own
pale aiɾ and ʃakinɡ aʝ obeɾ. mit͡ʃaelis adbised ʝm to ɡo to bed but
wilson ɾefused, saiinɡ tat e'd miss a lot of business if e did.
wʝle ʝs neiɡboɾ was tɾiinɡ to peɾswade ʝm a bjolent ɾakket bɾoke
out obeɾead.

"i'be ɡot mi wife lokked in up teɾe," eksplained wilson kalmli.
"ʃe's ɡoinɡ to stai teɾe tiʝ te dai afteɾ tomorow and ten we'ɾe
ɡoinɡ to mobe awai."

mit͡ʃaelis was astoniʃed; tei ad been neiɡboɾs foɾ fouɾ ieaɾs and
wilson ad nebeɾ seemed faint͡ɬi kapable of sut͡ʃ a statement. xeneɾaʝi
e was one of tese woɾn-out men: wen e wasn't woɾkinɡ e sat on a
t͡ʃaiɾ in te dooɾwai and staɾed at te people and te kaɾs tat passed
alonɡ te ɾoad. wen ani one spoke to ʝm e inbaɾjabli lauɡed in an
aɡɾeeable, koloɾless wai. e was ʝs wife's man and not ʝs own.

so natuɾaʝi mit͡ʃaelis tɾjed to find out wat ad appened, but wilson
wouldn't sai a woɾd--instead e beɡan to tɾow kuɾjous, suspisious
ɡlanses at ʝs bisitoɾ and ask ʝm wat e'd been doinɡ at seɾtain
times on seɾtain dais. xust as te latteɾ was xettinɡ uneasi some
woɾkmen kame past te dooɾ bound foɾ ʝs ɾestauɾant and mit͡ʃaelis took
te oppoɾtuniti to xet awai, intendinɡ to kome bakk lateɾ. but e didn't.
e supposed e foɾɡot to, tat's aʝ. wen e kame outside aɡain
a litt͡ɬe afteɾ seben e was ɾeminded of te konbeɾsatjon bekause e
eaɾd mɾs. wilson's boise, loud and skoldinɡ, downstaiɾs in te ɡaɾaxe.

"beat me!" e eaɾd eɾ kɾi. "tɾow me down and beat me, iou diɾti
litt͡ɬe kowaɾd!"

a moment lateɾ ʃe ɾuʃed out into te dusk, wabinɡ eɾ ands and
ʃoutinɡ; befoɾe e kould mobe fɾom ʝs dooɾ te business was obeɾ.

te "deat kaɾ" as te newspapeɾs kaʝed it, didn't stop; it kame out
of te ɡateɾinɡ daɾkness, wabeɾed tɾaxikaʝi foɾ a moment and ten
disappeaɾed aɾound te nekst bend. mit͡ʃaelis wasn't eben suɾe of its
koloɾ--e told te fiɾst poliseman tat it was liɡt ɡɾeen. te oteɾ
kaɾ, te one ɡoinɡ towaɾd new ioɾk, kame to ɾest a wndɾed iaɾds
beiond, and its dɾibeɾ wrjed bakk to weɾe miɾt͡ɬe wilson, eɾ life
bjolent͡ɬi ekstinɡiʃed, knelt in te ɾoad and minɡled eɾ tʝkk, daɾk
blood wit te dust.

mit͡ʃaelis and tʝs man ɾeat͡ʃed eɾ fiɾst but wen tei ad toɾn open
eɾ ʃiɾtwaist stiʝ damp wit peɾspiɾatjon, tei saw tat eɾ left
bɾeast was swinxinɡ loose like a flap and teɾe was no need to listen
foɾ te eaɾt beneat. te mout was wide open and ɾipped at te
koɾneɾs as touɡ ʃe ad t͡ʃoked a litt͡ɬe in xibinɡ up te tɾemendous
bitaliti ʃe ad stoɾed so lonɡ.


we saw te tɾee oɾ fouɾ automobiles and te kɾowd wen we weɾe stiʝ
some distanse awai.

"wɾekk!" said tom. "tat's ɡood. wilson'ʝ abe a litt͡ɬe business
at last."

e slowed down, but stiʝ witout ani intentjon of stoppinɡ until,
as we kame neaɾeɾ, te wʃed intent fases of te people at te ɡaɾaxe
dooɾ made ʝm automatikaʝi put on te bɾakes.

"we'ʝ take a look," e said doubtfuʝi, "xust a look."

i bekame awaɾe now of a oʝow, wailinɡ sound wʝt͡ʃ isswed insessant͡ɬi
fɾom te ɡaɾaxe, a sound wʝt͡ʃ as we ɡot out of te koupe and walked
towaɾd te dooɾ ɾesolbed itself into te woɾds "o, mi ɡod!" utteɾed obeɾ
and obeɾ in a ɡaspinɡ moan.

"teɾe's some bad tɾouble eɾe," said tom ekssitedli.

e ɾeat͡ʃed up on tiptoes and peeɾed obeɾ a siɾkle of eads into te
ɡaɾaxe wʝt͡ʃ was lit onli bi a ieʝow liɡt in a swinxinɡ wiɾe basket
obeɾead. ten e made a aɾʃ sound in ʝs tɾoat and wit a bjolent
tɾustinɡ mobement of ʝs poweɾful aɾms puʃed ʝs wai tɾouɡ.

te siɾkle klosed up aɡain wit a ɾunninɡ muɾmuɾ of ekspostulatjon; it
was a minute befoɾe i kould see anitʝnɡ at aʝ. ten new aribals
disaranxed te line and xoɾdan and i weɾe puʃed suddenli inside.

miɾt͡ɬe wilson's bodi wɾapped in a blanket and ten in anoteɾ
blanket as touɡ ʃe suffeɾed fɾom a t͡ʃiʝ in te ot niɡt lai on a
woɾk table bi te waʝ and tom, wit ʝs bakk to us, was bendinɡ obeɾ
it, motjonless. nekst to ʝm stood a motoɾkikle poliseman takinɡ down
names wit mut͡ʃ sweat and korektjon in a litt͡ɬe book. at fiɾst i
kouldn't find te souɾse of te ʝɡ, ɡɾoaninɡ woɾds tat et͡ʃoed
klamoɾousli tɾouɡ te baɾe ɡaɾaxe--ten i saw wilson standinɡ on te
ɾaised tɾeʃold of ʝs offise, swaiinɡ bakk and foɾt and oldinɡ to
te dooɾposts wit bot ands. some man was talkinɡ to ʝm in a low
boise and attemptinɡ fɾom time to time to lai a and on ʝs ʃouldeɾ,
but wilson neiteɾ eaɾd noɾ saw. ʝs eies would dɾop slowli fɾom te
swinxinɡ liɡt to te laden table bi te waʝ and ten xeɾk bakk to
te liɡt aɡain and e ɡabe out insessant͡ɬi ʝs ʝɡ orible kaʝ.

"o, mi ɡa-od! o, mi ɡa-od! o, ɡa-od! o, mi ɡa-od!"

pɾesent͡ɬi tom lifted ʝs ead wit a xeɾk and afteɾ staɾinɡ aɾound te
ɡaɾaxe wit ɡlased eies addɾessed a mumbled inkoeɾent ɾemaɾk to te
poliseman.

"m-a-b--" te poliseman was saiinɡ, "--o----"

"no,--ɾ--" korekted te man, "m-a-b-ɾ-o----"

"listen to me!" mutteɾed tom fjeɾseli.

"ɾ--" said te poliseman, "o----"

"ɡ----"

"ɡ--" e looked up as tom's bɾoad and feʝ ʃaɾpli on ʝs ʃouldeɾ.
"wat iou want, feʝa?"

"wat appened--tat's wat i want to know!"

"auto ʝt eɾ. ins'ant͡ɬi kiʝed."

"instant͡ɬi kiʝed," ɾepeated tom, staɾinɡ.

"ʃe ɾan out ina ɾoad. son-of-a-bitt͡ʃ didn't eben stopus kaɾ."

"teɾe was two kaɾs," said mit͡ʃaelis, "one komin', one ɡoin', see?"

"ɡoinɡ weɾe?" asked te poliseman keenli.

"one ɡoin' eat͡ʃ wai. weʝ, ʃe--" ʝs and ɾose towaɾd te blankets but
stopped alf wai and feʝ to ʝs side, "--ʃe ɾan out teɾe an' te one
komin' fɾom n'ioɾk knokk ɾiɡt into eɾ ɡoin' tʝɾti oɾ foɾti miles an
ouɾ."

"wat's te name of tʝs plase eɾe?" demanded te offiseɾ.

"asn't ɡot ani name."

a pale, weʝ-dɾessed neɡɾo stepped neaɾ.

"it was a ieʝow kaɾ," e said, "biɡ ieʝow kaɾ. new."

"see te aksident?" asked te poliseman.

"no, but te kaɾ passed me down te ɾoad, ɡoinɡ fasteɾ'n foɾti. ɡoinɡ
fifti, siksti."

"kome eɾe and let's abe iouɾ name. look out now. i want to xet ʝs
name."

some woɾds of tʝs konbeɾsatjon must abe ɾeat͡ʃed wilson swaiinɡ
in te offise dooɾ, foɾ suddenli a new teme found boise amonɡ
ʝs ɡaspinɡ kɾjes.

"iou don't abe to teʝ me wat kind of kaɾ it was! i know wat kind of
kaɾ it was!"

watt͡ʃinɡ tom i saw te wad of muskle bakk of ʝs ʃouldeɾ tiɡten
undeɾ ʝs koat. e walked kikkli obeɾ to wilson and standinɡ
in fɾont of ʝm seised ʝm fiɾmli bi te uppeɾ aɾms.

"iou'be ɡot to puʝ iouɾself toxeteɾ," e said wit sootʝnɡ
ɡɾuffness.

wilson's eies feʝ upon tom; e staɾted up on ʝs tiptoes and ten
would abe koʝapsed to ʝs knees ad not tom eld ʝm upɾiɡt.

"listen," said tom, ʃakinɡ ʝm a litt͡ɬe. "i xust ɡot eɾe a minute aɡo,
fɾom new ioɾk. i was bɾinxinɡ iou tat koupe we'be been talkinɡ about.
tat ieʝow kaɾ i was dɾibinɡ tʝs afteɾnoon wasn't mine, do iou eaɾ? i
aben't seen it aʝ afteɾnoon."

onli te neɡɾo and i weɾe neaɾ enouɡ to eaɾ wat e said but te
poliseman kauɡt sometʝnɡ in te tone and looked obeɾ wit tɾukulent
eies.

"wat's aʝ tat?" e demanded.

"i'm a fɾjend of ʝs." tom tuɾned ʝs ead but kept ʝs ands fiɾm on
wilson's bodi. "e sais e knows te kaɾ tat did it. . . . it was a ieʝow
kaɾ."

some dim impulse mobed te poliseman to look suspisiousli at tom.

"and wat koloɾ's iouɾ kaɾ?"

"it's a blwe kaɾ, a koupe."

"we'be kome stɾaiɡt fɾom new ioɾk," i said.

some one wo ad been dɾibinɡ a litt͡ɬe beʝnd us konfiɾmed tʝs and
te poliseman tuɾned awai.

"now, if iou'ʝ let me abe tat name aɡain korekt----"

pikkinɡ up wilson like a doʝ tom karjed ʝm into te offise,
set ʝm down in a t͡ʃaiɾ and kame bakk.

"if somebodi'ʝ kome eɾe and sit wit ʝm!" e snapped
autoɾitatibeli. e watt͡ʃed wʝle te two men standinɡ klosest ɡlansed
at eat͡ʃ oteɾ and went unwiʝinɡli into te ɾoom. ten tom ʃut te
dooɾ on tem and kame down te sinɡle step, ʝs eies aboidinɡ te
table. as e passed klose to me e wʝspeɾed "let's xet out."

self konssiousli, wit ʝs autoɾitatibe aɾms bɾeakinɡ te wai, we
puʃed tɾouɡ te stiʝ ɡateɾinɡ kɾowd, passinɡ a wrjed doktoɾ,
kase in and, wo ad been sent foɾ in wild ope alf an ouɾ aɡo.

tom dɾobe slowli until we weɾe beiond te bend--ten ʝs foot kame down
aɾd and te koupe ɾased alonɡ tɾouɡ te niɡt. in a litt͡ɬe wʝle i
eaɾd a low wski sob and saw tat te teaɾs weɾe obeɾflowinɡ down ʝs
fase.

"te ɡod damn kowaɾd!" e wʝmpeɾed. "e didn't eben stop ʝs kaɾ."


te but͡ʃanans' ouse floated suddenli towaɾd us tɾouɡ te daɾk ɾust͡ɬinɡ
tɾees. tom stopped beside te poɾt͡ʃ and looked up at te sekond flooɾ
weɾe two windows bloomed wit liɡt amonɡ te bines.

"daisi's ome," e said. as we ɡot out of te kaɾ e ɡlansed at me and
fɾowned sliɡt͡ɬi.

"i ouɡt to abe dɾopped iou in west eɡɡ, nikk. teɾe's notʝnɡ we kan
do toniɡt."

a t͡ʃanxe ad kome obeɾ ʝm and e spoke ɡɾabeli, and wit desisjon.
as we walked akɾoss te moonliɡt ɡɾabel to te poɾt͡ʃ e disposed of
te sitwatjon in a few bɾisk pɾases.

"i'ʝ telepone foɾ a taksi to take iou ome, and wʝle iou'ɾe waitinɡ
iou and xoɾdan betteɾ ɡo in te kitt͡ʃen and abe tem xet iou some
suppeɾ--if iou want ani." e opened te dooɾ. "kome in."

"no tanks. but i'd be ɡlad if iou'd oɾdeɾ me te taksi. i'ʝ wait
outside."

xoɾdan put eɾ and on mi aɾm.

"won't iou kome in, nikk?"

"no tanks."

i was feelinɡ a litt͡ɬe sikk and i wanted to be alone. but xoɾdan linxeɾed
foɾ a moment moɾe.

"it's onli alf past nine," ʃe said.

i'd be damned if i'd ɡo in; i'd ad enouɡ of aʝ of tem foɾ one dai
and suddenli tat inkluded xoɾdan too. ʃe must abe seen sometʝnɡ of
tʝs in mi ekspɾessjon foɾ ʃe tuɾned abɾupt͡ɬi awai and ɾan up te
poɾt͡ʃ steps into te ouse. i sat down foɾ a few minutes wit mi ead
in mi ands, until i eaɾd te pone taken up inside and te but͡ɬeɾ's
boise kaʝinɡ a taksi. ten i walked slowli down te dɾibe awai fɾom te
ouse intendinɡ to wait bi te ɡate.

i adn't ɡone twenti iaɾds wen i eaɾd mi name and ɡatsbi stepped fɾom
between two buʃes into te pat. i must abe felt pɾetti weiɾd bi tat
time bekause i kould tʝnk of notʝnɡ ekssept te luminositi of ʝs
pink swit undeɾ te moon.

"wat aɾe iou doinɡ?" i inkiɾed.

"xust standinɡ eɾe, old spoɾt."

someow, tat seemed a despikable okkupatjon. foɾ aʝ i knew e was ɡoinɡ
to ɾob te ouse in a moment; i wouldn't abe been suɾpɾised to see
sinisteɾ fases, te fases of "wolfʃjem's people," beʝnd ʝm in te
daɾk ʃɾubbeɾi.

"did iou see ani tɾouble on te ɾoad?" e asked afteɾ a minute.

"ies."

e esitated.

"was ʃe kiʝed?"

"ies."

"i touɡt so; i told daisi i touɡt so. it's betteɾ tat te ʃokk
ʃould aʝ kome at onse. ʃe stood it pɾetti weʝ."

e spoke as if daisi's ɾeaktjon was te onli tʝnɡ tat matteɾed.

"i ɡot to west eɡɡ bi a side ɾoad," e went on, "and left te kaɾ in mi
ɡaɾaxe. i don't tʝnk anibodi saw us but of kouɾse i kan't be suɾe."

i disliked ʝm so mut͡ʃ bi tʝs time tat i didn't find it nesessaɾi to
teʝ ʝm e was wɾonɡ.

"wo was te woman?" e inkiɾed.

"eɾ name was wilson. eɾ wsband owns te ɡaɾaxe. ow te debil did it
appen?"

"weʝ, i tɾjed to swinɡ te weel----" e bɾoke off, and suddenli i
ɡessed at te tɾut.

"was daisi dɾibinɡ?"

"ies," e said afteɾ a moment, "but of kouɾse i'ʝ sai i was. iou see,
wen we left new ioɾk ʃe was beɾi neɾbous and ʃe touɡt it would
steadi eɾ to dɾibe--and tʝs woman ɾuʃed out at us xust as we weɾe
passinɡ a kaɾ kominɡ te oteɾ wai. it aʝ appened in a minute but it
seemed to me tat ʃe wanted to speak to us, touɡt we weɾe somebodi
ʃe knew. weʝ, fiɾst daisi tuɾned awai fɾom te woman towaɾd te oteɾ
kaɾ, and ten ʃe lost eɾ neɾbe and tuɾned bakk. te sekond mi and
ɾeat͡ʃed te weel i felt te ʃokk--it must abe kiʝed eɾ instant͡ɬi."

"it ɾipped eɾ open----"

"don't teʝ me, old spoɾt." e winsed. "aniow--daisi stepped on it.
i tɾjed to make eɾ stop, but ʃe kouldn't so i puʝed on te emeɾxenki
bɾake. ten ʃe feʝ obeɾ into mi lap and i dɾobe on.

"ʃe'ʝ be aʝ ɾiɡt tomorow," e said pɾesent͡ɬi. "i'm xust ɡoinɡ to
wait eɾe and see if e tɾjes to boteɾ eɾ about tat unpleasantness
tʝs afteɾnoon. ʃe's lokked eɾself into eɾ ɾoom and if e tɾjes ani
bɾutaliti ʃe's ɡoinɡ to tuɾn te liɡt out and on aɡain."

"e won't tout͡ʃ eɾ," i said. "e's not tʝnkinɡ about eɾ."

"i don't tɾust ʝm, old spoɾt."

"ow lonɡ aɾe iou ɡoinɡ to wait?"

"aʝ niɡt if nesessaɾi. aniow tiʝ tei aʝ ɡo to bed."

a new point of bjew okkured to me. suppose tom found out tat daisi ad
been dɾibinɡ. e miɡt tʝnk e saw a konnektjon in it--e miɡt tʝnk
anitʝnɡ. i looked at te ouse: teɾe weɾe two oɾ tɾee bɾiɡt windows
downstaiɾs and te pink ɡlow fɾom daisi's ɾoom on te sekond flooɾ.

"iou wait eɾe," i said. "i'ʝ see if teɾe's ani siɡn of a kommotjon."

i walked bakk alonɡ te boɾdeɾ of te lawn, tɾabeɾsed te ɡɾabel soft͡ɬi
and tiptoed up te beɾanda steps. te dɾawinɡ-ɾoom kuɾtains weɾe open,
and i saw tat te ɾoom was empti. kɾossinɡ te poɾt͡ʃ weɾe we ad dined
tat xune niɡt tɾee monts befoɾe i kame to a smaʝ ɾektanɡle of liɡt
wʝt͡ʃ i ɡessed was te pantɾi window. te blind was dɾawn but i found
a ɾift at te siʝ.

daisi and tom weɾe sittinɡ opposite eat͡ʃ oteɾ at te kitt͡ʃen table
wit a plate of kold fɾjed t͡ʃikken between tem and two bott͡ɬes of
ale. e was talkinɡ intent͡ɬi akɾoss te table at eɾ and in ʝs
eaɾnestness ʝs and ad faʝen upon and kobeɾed eɾ own. onse in a
wʝle ʃe looked up at ʝm and nodded in aɡɾeement.

tei weɾen't appi, and neiteɾ of tem ad tout͡ʃed te t͡ʃikken oɾ te
ale--and iet tei weɾen't unappi eiteɾ. teɾe was an unmistakable aiɾ
of natuɾal intimaki about te piktuɾe and anibodi would abe said tat
tei weɾe konspiɾinɡ toxeteɾ.

as i tiptoed fɾom te poɾt͡ʃ i eaɾd mi taksi feelinɡ its wai alonɡ te
daɾk ɾoad towaɾd te ouse. ɡatsbi was waitinɡ weɾe i ad left ʝm in
te dɾibe.

"is it aʝ kjet up teɾe?" e asked anksjousli.

"ies, it's aʝ kjet." i esitated. "iou'd betteɾ kome ome and xet
some sleep."

e ʃook ʝs ead.

"i want to wait eɾe tiʝ daisi ɡoes to bed. ɡood niɡt, old spoɾt."

e put ʝs ands in ʝs koat pokkets and tuɾned bakk eaxeɾli to ʝs
skɾutini of te ouse, as touɡ mi pɾesense mared te sakɾedness of
te bixil. so i walked awai and left ʝm standinɡ teɾe in te
moonliɡt--watt͡ʃinɡ obeɾ notʝnɡ.




t͡ʃapteɾ 8



i kouldn't sleep aʝ niɡt; a foɡ-oɾn was ɡɾoaninɡ insessant͡ɬi on te
sound, and i tossed alf-sikk between ɡɾoteske ɾealiti and sabaxe
fɾiɡteninɡ dɾeams. towaɾd dawn i eaɾd a taksi ɡo up ɡatsbi's dɾibe
and immedjateli i xumped out of bed and beɡan to dɾess--i felt tat i
ad sometʝnɡ to teʝ ʝm, sometʝnɡ to waɾn ʝm about and moɾninɡ
would be too late.

kɾossinɡ ʝs lawn i saw tat ʝs fɾont dooɾ was stiʝ open and e was
leaninɡ aɡainst a table in te aʝ, eabi wit dexektjon oɾ sleep.

"notʝnɡ appened," e said wanli. "i waited, and about fouɾ o'klokk ʃe
kame to te window and stood teɾe foɾ a minute and ten tuɾned out
te liɡt."

ʝs ouse ad nebeɾ seemed so enoɾmous to me as it did tat niɡt wen we
wnted tɾouɡ te ɡɾeat ɾooms foɾ siɡaɾettes. we puʃed aside kuɾtains
tat weɾe like pabiljons and felt obeɾ innumeɾable feet of daɾk waʝ foɾ
elektɾik liɡt switt͡ʃes--onse i tumbled wit a soɾt of splaʃ upon te
keis of a ɡost͡ɬi pjano. teɾe was an ineksplikable amount of dust
ebeɾiweɾe and te ɾooms weɾe musti as touɡ tei adn't been aiɾed foɾ
mani dais. i found te wmidoɾ on an unfamiljaɾ table wit two stale dɾi
siɡaɾettes inside. tɾowinɡ open te fɾent͡ʃ windows of te
dɾawinɡ-ɾoom we sat smokinɡ out into te daɾkness.

"iou ouɡt to ɡo awai," i said. "it's pɾetti seɾtain tei'ʝ tɾase
iouɾ kaɾ."

"ɡo awai now, old spoɾt?"

"ɡo to at͡ɬantik siti foɾ a week, oɾ up to montɾeal."

e wouldn't konsideɾ it. e kouldn't possibli leabe daisi until e knew
wat ʃe was ɡoinɡ to do. e was klutt͡ʃinɡ at some last ope and i
kouldn't beaɾ to ʃake ʝm fɾee.

it was tʝs niɡt tat e told me te stɾanxe stoɾi of ʝs iout wit
dan kodi--told it to me bekause "xai ɡatsbi" ad bɾoken up like ɡlass
aɡainst tom's aɾd malise and te lonɡ sekɾet ekstɾabaɡansa was plaied
out. i tʝnk tat e would abe akknowledxed anitʝnɡ, now, witout
ɾeseɾbe, but e wanted to talk about daisi.

ʃe was te fiɾst "nise" xiɾl e ad ebeɾ known. in baɾjous unɾebealed
kapasitjes e ad kome in kontakt wit sut͡ʃ people but alwais
wit indisseɾnible baɾbed wiɾe between. e found eɾ ekssitinɡli
desiɾable. e went to eɾ ouse, at fiɾst wit oteɾ offiseɾs
fɾom kamp tailoɾ, ten alone. it amased ʝm--e ad nebeɾ been
in sut͡ʃ a beautiful ouse befoɾe. but wat ɡabe it an aiɾ of bɾeatless
intensiti was tat daisi libed teɾe--it was as kaswal a tʝnɡ to eɾ
as ʝs tent out at kamp was to ʝm. teɾe was a ɾipe misteɾi about it,
a ʝnt of bedɾooms upstaiɾs moɾe beautiful and kool tan oteɾ
bedɾooms, of ɡai and ɾadjant aktibitjes takinɡ plase tɾouɡ its
koridoɾs and of ɾomanses tat weɾe not musti and laid awai alɾeadi in
labendeɾ but fɾeʃ and bɾeatʝnɡ and ɾedolent of tʝs ieaɾ's ʃininɡ
motoɾ kaɾs and of danses wose floweɾs weɾe skaɾseli witeɾed. it
ekssited ʝm too tat mani men ad alɾeadi lobed daisi--it inkɾeased
eɾ balwe in ʝs eies. e felt teiɾ pɾesense aʝ about te ouse,
peɾbadinɡ te aiɾ wit te ʃades and et͡ʃoes of stiʝ bibɾant emotjons.

but e knew tat e was in daisi's ouse bi a kolossal aksident.
owebeɾ ɡloɾjous miɡt be ʝs futuɾe as xai ɡatsbi, e was at pɾesent a
penniless iounɡ man witout a past, and at ani moment te inbisible
kloak of ʝs unifoɾm miɡt slip fɾom ʝs ʃouldeɾs. so e made
te most of ʝs time. e took wat e kould xet, ɾabenousli and
unskɾupulousli--ebentwaʝi e took daisi one stiʝ oktobeɾ niɡt,
took eɾ bekause e ad no ɾeal ɾiɡt to tout͡ʃ eɾ and.

e miɡt abe despised ʝmself, foɾ e ad seɾtainli taken eɾ undeɾ
false pɾetenses. i don't mean tat e ad tɾaded on ʝs pantom
miʝjons, but e ad delibeɾateli xiben daisi a sense of sekuɾiti; e
let eɾ beljebe tat e was a peɾson fɾom mut͡ʃ te same stɾatum as
eɾself--tat e was fuʝi able to take kaɾe of eɾ. as a matteɾ of
fakt e ad no sut͡ʃ fasilitjes--e ad no komfoɾtable famili standinɡ
beʝnd ʝm and e was ljable at te wʝm of an impeɾsonal ɡobeɾnment
to be blown aniweɾe about te woɾld.

but e didn't despise ʝmself and it didn't tuɾn out as e ad
imaxined. e ad intended, pɾobabli, to take wat e kould and ɡo--but
now e found tat e ad kommitted ʝmself to te foʝowinɡ of a ɡɾail.
e knew tat daisi was ekstɾaoɾdinaɾi but e didn't ɾealise xust ow
ekstɾaoɾdinaɾi a "nise" xiɾl kould be. ʃe baniʃed into eɾ ɾit͡ʃ
ouse, into eɾ ɾit͡ʃ, fuʝ life, leabinɡ ɡatsbi--notʝnɡ. e felt
marjed to eɾ, tat was aʝ.

wen tei met aɡain two dais lateɾ it was ɡatsbi wo was bɾeatless,
wo was someow betɾaied. eɾ poɾt͡ʃ was bɾiɡt wit te bouɡt
luksuɾi of staɾ-ʃine; te wikkeɾ of te settee skeaked faʃjonabli
as ʃe tuɾned towaɾd ʝm and e kissed eɾ kuɾjous and lobeli mout.
ʃe ad kauɡt a kold and it made eɾ boise wskjeɾ and moɾe t͡ʃaɾminɡ
tan ebeɾ and ɡatsbi was obeɾwelminɡli awaɾe of te iout and misteɾi
tat wealt impɾisons and pɾeseɾbes, of te fɾeʃness of mani klotes
and of daisi, ɡleaminɡ like silbeɾ, safe and pɾoud abobe te ot
stɾuɡɡles of te pooɾ.


"i kan't deskɾibe to iou ow suɾpɾised i was to find out i lobed eɾ,
old spoɾt. i eben oped foɾ a wʝle tat ʃe'd tɾow me obeɾ, but ʃe
didn't, bekause ʃe was in lobe wit me too. ʃe touɡt i knew a lot
bekause i knew diffeɾent tʝnɡs fɾom eɾ. . . . weʝ, teɾe i was,
wai off mi ambitjons, xettinɡ deepeɾ in lobe ebeɾi minute, and
aʝ of a sudden i didn't kaɾe. wat was te use of doinɡ ɡɾeat
tʝnɡs if i kould abe a betteɾ time teʝinɡ eɾ wat i was ɡoinɡ
to do?"

on te last afteɾnoon befoɾe e went abɾoad e sat wit daisi in
ʝs aɾms foɾ a lonɡ, silent time. it was a kold faʝ dai wit fiɾe
in te ɾoom and eɾ t͡ʃeeks fluʃed. now and ten ʃe mobed and e
t͡ʃanxed ʝs aɾm a litt͡ɬe and onse e kissed eɾ daɾk ʃininɡ aiɾ. te
afteɾnoon ad made tem tɾankil foɾ a wʝle as if to xibe tem a deep
memoɾi foɾ te lonɡ paɾtinɡ te nekst dai pɾomised. tei ad nebeɾ been
kloseɾ in teiɾ mont of lobe noɾ kommunikated moɾe pɾofoundli one
wit anoteɾ tan wen ʃe bɾuʃed silent lips aɡainst ʝs koat's
ʃouldeɾ oɾ wen e tout͡ʃed te end of eɾ finxeɾs, xent͡ɬi, as touɡ
ʃe weɾe asleep.


e did ekstɾaoɾdinaɾili weʝ in te waɾ. e was a kaptain befoɾe e went
to te fɾont and foʝowinɡ te aɾɡonne batt͡ɬes e ɡot ʝs maxoɾiti and
te kommand of te dibisjonal mat͡ʃine ɡwns. afteɾ te aɾmistise
e tɾjed fɾantikaʝi to xet ome but some komplikatjon oɾ
misundeɾstandinɡ sent ʝm to oksfoɾd instead. e was worjed now--teɾe
was a kaliti of neɾbous despaiɾ in daisi's letteɾs. ʃe didn't see wi
e kouldn't kome. ʃe was feelinɡ te pɾessuɾe of te woɾld outside
and ʃe wanted to see ʝm and feel ʝs pɾesense beside eɾ and be
ɾeassuɾed tat ʃe was doinɡ te ɾiɡt tʝnɡ afteɾ aʝ.

foɾ daisi was iounɡ and eɾ aɾtifisial woɾld was ɾedolent of oɾt͡ʃids
and pleasant, t͡ʃeeɾful snobbeɾi and oɾt͡ʃestɾas wʝt͡ʃ set te ɾitm of
te ieaɾ, summinɡ up te sadness and suɡxestibeness of life in new
tunes. aʝ niɡt te saksopones wailed te opeless komment of te
"beale stɾeet blwes" wʝle a wndɾed paiɾs of ɡolden and silbeɾ
slippeɾs ʃuffled te ʃininɡ dust. at te ɡɾei tea ouɾ teɾe weɾe
alwais ɾooms tat tɾobbed insessant͡ɬi wit tʝs low sweet febeɾ,
wʝle fɾeʃ fases dɾifted eɾe and teɾe like ɾose petals blown bi te
sad oɾns aɾound te flooɾ.

tɾouɡ tʝs twiliɡt unibeɾse daisi beɡan to mobe aɡain wit te
season; suddenli ʃe was aɡain keepinɡ alf a dosen dates a dai wit
alf a dosen men and dɾowsinɡ asleep at dawn wit te beads and
t͡ʃiffon of an ebeninɡ dɾess tanɡled amonɡ diinɡ oɾt͡ʃids on te flooɾ
beside eɾ bed. and aʝ te time sometʝnɡ witʝn eɾ was kɾiinɡ foɾ a
desisjon. ʃe wanted eɾ life ʃaped now, immedjateli--and te desisjon
must be made bi some foɾse--of lobe, of monei, of unkestjonable
pɾaktikaliti--tat was klose at and.

tat foɾse took ʃape in te middle of spɾinɡ wit te aribal of tom
but͡ʃanan. teɾe was a wolesome bulkiness about ʝs peɾson and ʝs
positjon and daisi was flatteɾed. doubt͡ɬess teɾe was a seɾtain
stɾuɡɡle and a seɾtain ɾeljef. te letteɾ ɾeat͡ʃed ɡatsbi wʝle e was
stiʝ at oksfoɾd.


it was dawn now on lonɡ island and we went about openinɡ te ɾest of
te windows downstaiɾs, fiʝinɡ te ouse wit ɡɾei tuɾninɡ,
ɡold tuɾninɡ liɡt. te ʃadow of a tɾee feʝ abɾupt͡ɬi akɾoss te dew
and ɡost͡ɬi biɾds beɡan to sinɡ amonɡ te blwe leabes. teɾe was a
slow pleasant mobement in te aiɾ, skaɾseli a wind, pɾomisinɡ a kool
lobeli dai.

"i don't tʝnk ʃe ebeɾ lobed ʝm." ɡatsbi tuɾned aɾound fɾom a window
and looked at me t͡ʃaʝenxinɡli. "iou must ɾemembeɾ, old spoɾt, ʃe was
beɾi ekssited tʝs afteɾnoon. e told eɾ tose tʝnɡs in a wai tat
fɾiɡtened eɾ--tat made it look as if i was some kind of t͡ʃeap ʃaɾpeɾ.
and te ɾesult was ʃe aɾdli knew wat ʃe was saiinɡ."

e sat down ɡloomili.

"of kouɾse ʃe miɡt abe lobed ʝm, xust foɾ a minute, wen tei weɾe
fiɾst marjed--and lobed me moɾe eben ten, do iou see?"

suddenli e kame out wit a kuɾjous ɾemaɾk:

"in ani kase," e said, "it was xust peɾsonal."

wat kould iou make of tat, ekssept to suspekt some intensiti in
ʝs konseptjon of te affaiɾ tat kouldn't be measuɾed?

e kame bakk fɾom fɾanse wen tom and daisi weɾe stiʝ on teiɾ weddinɡ
tɾip, and made a miseɾable but iresistible xouɾnei to lowisbiʝe
on te last of ʝs aɾmi pai. e staied teɾe a week, walkinɡ te
stɾeets weɾe teiɾ footsteps ad klikked toxeteɾ tɾouɡ te
nobembeɾ niɡt and ɾebisitinɡ te out-of-te-wai plases to wʝt͡ʃ
tei ad dɾiben in eɾ wʝte kaɾ. xust as daisi's ouse ad alwais
seemed to ʝm moɾe misteɾjous and ɡai tan oteɾ ouses so ʝs
idea of te siti itself, eben touɡ ʃe was ɡone fɾom it, was peɾbaded
wit a melant͡ʃoli beauti.

e left feelinɡ tat if e ad seaɾt͡ʃed aɾdeɾ e miɡt abe found
eɾ--tat e was leabinɡ eɾ beʝnd. te dai-koat͡ʃ--e was penniless
now--was ot. e went out to te open bestibule and sat down on a
foldinɡ-t͡ʃaiɾ, and te statjon slid awai and te bakks of unfamiljaɾ
bwildinɡs mobed bi. ten out into te spɾinɡ fjelds, weɾe a ieʝow
tɾoʝei ɾased tem foɾ a minute wit people in it wo miɡt onse abe
seen te pale maxik of eɾ fase alonɡ te kaswal stɾeet.

te tɾakk kuɾbed and now it was ɡoinɡ awai fɾom te sun wʝt͡ʃ, as it
sank loweɾ, seemed to spɾead itself in benediktjon obeɾ te baniʃinɡ
siti weɾe ʃe ad dɾawn eɾ bɾeat. e stɾett͡ʃed out ʝs and
despeɾateli as if to snatt͡ʃ onli a wisp of aiɾ, to sabe a fɾaɡment of
te spot tat ʃe ad made lobeli foɾ ʝm. but it was aʝ ɡoinɡ bi too
fast now foɾ ʝs blured eies and e knew tat e ad lost tat paɾt of
it, te fɾeʃest and te best, foɾebeɾ.


it was nine o'klokk wen we finiʃed bɾeakfast and went out on te
poɾt͡ʃ. te niɡt ad made a ʃaɾp diffeɾense in te weateɾ and teɾe
was an autumn flaboɾ in te aiɾ. te ɡaɾdeneɾ, te last one of ɡatsbi's
foɾmeɾ seɾbants, kame to te foot of te steps.

"i'm ɡoinɡ to dɾain te pool todai, mɾ. ɡatsbi. leabes'ʝ staɾt faʝinɡ
pɾetti soon and ten teɾe's alwais tɾouble wit te pipes."

"don't do it todai," ɡatsbi answeɾed. e tuɾned to me apoloxetikaʝi.
"iou know, old spoɾt, i'be nebeɾ used tat pool aʝ summeɾ?"

i looked at mi watt͡ʃ and stood up.

"twelbe minutes to mi tɾain."

i didn't want to ɡo to te siti. i wasn't woɾt a desent stɾoke of woɾk
but it was moɾe tan tat--i didn't want to leabe ɡatsbi. i missed tat
tɾain, and ten anoteɾ, befoɾe i kould xet miself awai.

"i'ʝ kaʝ iou up," i said finaʝi.

"do, old spoɾt."

"i'ʝ kaʝ iou about noon."

we walked slowli down te steps.

"i suppose daisi'ʝ kaʝ too." e looked at me anksjousli as if e
oped i'd koroboɾate tʝs.

"i suppose so."

"weʝ--ɡoodbie."

we ʃook ands and i staɾted awai. xust befoɾe i ɾeat͡ʃed te edxe i
ɾemembeɾed sometʝnɡ and tuɾned aɾound.

"tei'ɾe a ɾotten kɾowd," i ʃouted akɾoss te lawn. "iou'ɾe woɾt te
wole damn bunt͡ʃ put toxeteɾ."

i'be alwais been ɡlad i said tat. it was te onli kompliment i ebeɾ ɡabe
ʝm, bekause i disappɾobed of ʝm fɾom bexinninɡ to end. fiɾst e nodded
politeli, and ten ʝs fase bɾoke into tat ɾadjant and undeɾstandinɡ
smile, as if we'd been in ekstatik kaoots on tat fakt aʝ te time.
ʝs ɡoɾxeous pink ɾaɡ of a swit made a bɾiɡt spot of koloɾ aɡainst te
wʝte steps and i touɡt of te niɡt wen i fiɾst kame to ʝs ansestɾal
ome tɾee monts befoɾe. te lawn and dɾibe ad been kɾowded wit te
fases of tose wo ɡessed at ʝs koruptjon--and e ad stood on tose
steps, konsealinɡ ʝs inkoruptible dɾeam, as e wabed tem ɡoodbie.

i tanked ʝm foɾ ʝs ospitaliti. we weɾe alwais tankinɡ ʝm foɾ
tat--i and te oteɾs.

"ɡoodbie," i kaʝed. "i enxoied bɾeakfast, ɡatsbi."


up in te siti i tɾjed foɾ a wʝle to list te kotatjons on an
inteɾminable amount of stokk, ten i feʝ asleep in mi swibel-t͡ʃaiɾ.
xust befoɾe noon te pone woke me and i staɾted up wit sweat
bɾeakinɡ out on mi foɾeead. it was xoɾdan bakeɾ; ʃe often kaʝed
me up at tʝs ouɾ bekause te unseɾtainti of eɾ own mobements
between otels and klubs and pɾibate ouses made eɾ aɾd to find
in ani oteɾ wai. uswaʝi eɾ boise kame obeɾ te wiɾe as sometʝnɡ
fɾeʃ and kool as if a dibot fɾom a ɡɾeen ɡolf links ad kome
sailinɡ in at te offise window but tʝs moɾninɡ it seemed aɾʃ and dɾi.

"i'be left daisi's ouse," ʃe said. "i'm at empstead and i'm ɡoinɡ down
to soutampton tʝs afteɾnoon."

pɾobabli it ad been taktful to leabe daisi's ouse, but te akt
annoied me and eɾ nekst ɾemaɾk made me ɾixid.

"iou weɾen't so nise to me last niɡt."

"ow kould it abe matteɾed ten?"

silense foɾ a moment. ten--

"owebeɾ--i want to see iou."

"i want to see iou too."

"suppose i don't ɡo to soutampton, and kome into town tʝs afteɾnoon?"

"no--i don't tʝnk tʝs afteɾnoon."

"beɾi weʝ."

"it's impossible tʝs afteɾnoon. baɾjous----"

we talked like tat foɾ a wʝle and ten abɾupt͡ɬi we weɾen't talkinɡ ani
lonxeɾ. i don't know wʝt͡ʃ of us wnɡ up wit a ʃaɾp klikk but i know i
didn't kaɾe. i kouldn't abe talked to eɾ akɾoss a tea-table tat dai if
i nebeɾ talked to eɾ aɡain in tʝs woɾld.

i kaʝed ɡatsbi's ouse a few minutes lateɾ, but te line was busi. i
tɾjed fouɾ times; finaʝi an eksaspeɾated sentɾal told me te wiɾe was
beinɡ kept open foɾ lonɡ distanse fɾom detɾoit. takinɡ out mi
time-table i dɾew a smaʝ siɾkle aɾound te tɾee-fifti tɾain. ten i
leaned bakk in mi t͡ʃaiɾ and tɾjed to tʝnk. it was xust noon.


wen i passed te aʃeaps on te tɾain tat moɾninɡ i ad kɾossed
delibeɾateli to te oteɾ side of te kaɾ. i suppose teɾe'd be a
kuɾjous kɾowd aɾound teɾe aʝ dai wit litt͡ɬe bois seaɾt͡ʃinɡ foɾ daɾk
spots in te dust and some ɡarulous man teʝinɡ obeɾ and obeɾ wat
ad appened until it bekame less and less ɾeal eben to ʝm and e
kould teʝ it no lonxeɾ and miɾt͡ɬe wilson's tɾaxik at͡ʃjebement was
foɾɡotten. now i want to ɡo bakk a litt͡ɬe and teʝ wat appened at te
ɡaɾaxe afteɾ we left teɾe te niɡt befoɾe.

tei ad diffikulti in lokatinɡ te sisteɾ, kateɾine. ʃe must
abe bɾoken eɾ ɾule aɡainst dɾinkinɡ tat niɡt foɾ wen ʃe
aribed ʃe was stupid wit likoɾ and unable to undeɾstand tat te
ambulanse ad alɾeadi ɡone to fluʃinɡ. wen tei konbinsed eɾ of
tʝs ʃe immedjateli fainted as if tat was te intoleɾable paɾt of
te affaiɾ. someone kind oɾ kuɾjous took eɾ in ʝs kaɾ and dɾobe
eɾ in te wake of eɾ sisteɾ's bodi.

until lonɡ afteɾ midniɡt a t͡ʃanxinɡ kɾowd lapped up aɡainst te fɾont
of te ɡaɾaxe wʝle xeoɾxe wilson ɾokked ʝmself bakk and foɾt on te
kout͡ʃ inside. foɾ a wʝle te dooɾ of te offise was open and
ebeɾione wo kame into te ɡaɾaxe ɡlansed iresistibli tɾouɡ it.
finaʝi someone said it was a ʃame and klosed te dooɾ. mit͡ʃaelis and
sebeɾal oteɾ men weɾe wit ʝm--fiɾst fouɾ oɾ fibe men, lateɾ two oɾ
tɾee men. stiʝ lateɾ mit͡ʃaelis ad to ask te last stɾanxeɾ to wait
teɾe fifteen minutes lonxeɾ wʝle e went bakk to ʝs own plase and made
a pot of koffee. afteɾ tat e staied teɾe alone wit wilson until dawn.

about tɾee o'klokk te kaliti of wilson's inkoeɾent mutteɾinɡ
t͡ʃanxed--e ɡɾew kjeteɾ and beɡan to talk about te ieʝow kaɾ. e
announsed tat e ad a wai of findinɡ out wom te ieʝow kaɾ belonxed
to, and ten e bluɾted out tat a kouple of monts aɡo ʝs wife ad
kome fɾom te siti wit eɾ fase bɾwised and eɾ nose swoʝen.

but wen e eaɾd ʝmself sai tʝs, e flint͡ʃed and beɡan to kɾi "o,
mi ɡod!" aɡain in ʝs ɡɾoaninɡ boise. mit͡ʃaelis made a klumsi attempt
to distɾakt ʝm.

"ow lonɡ abe iou been marjed, xeoɾxe? kome on teɾe, tɾi and sit
stiʝ a minute and answeɾ mi kestjon. ow lonɡ abe iou been marjed?"

"twelbe ieaɾs."

"ebeɾ ad ani t͡ʃildɾen? kome on, xeoɾxe, sit stiʝ--i asked iou a
kestjon. did iou ebeɾ abe ani t͡ʃildɾen?"

te aɾd bɾown beet͡ɬes kept twddinɡ aɡainst te duʝ liɡt and wenebeɾ
mit͡ʃaelis eaɾd a kaɾ ɡo teaɾinɡ alonɡ te ɾoad outside it sounded to ʝm
like te kaɾ tat adn't stopped a few ouɾs befoɾe. e didn't like to ɡo
into te ɡaɾaxe bekause te woɾk bent͡ʃ was stained weɾe te bodi ad
been liinɡ so e mobed unkomfoɾtabli aɾound te offise--e knew ebeɾi
obxekt in it befoɾe moɾninɡ--and fɾom time to time sat down beside wilson
tɾiinɡ to keep ʝm moɾe kjet.

"abe iou ɡot a t͡ʃuɾt͡ʃ iou ɡo to sometimes, xeoɾxe? maibe eben if iou
aben't been teɾe foɾ a lonɡ time? maibe i kould kaʝ up te t͡ʃuɾt͡ʃ
and xet a pɾjest to kome obeɾ and e kould talk to iou, see?"

"don't belonɡ to ani."

"iou ouɡt to abe a t͡ʃuɾt͡ʃ, xeoɾxe, foɾ times like tʝs. iou must abe
ɡone to t͡ʃuɾt͡ʃ onse. didn't iou xet marjed in a t͡ʃuɾt͡ʃ? listen, xeoɾxe,
listen to me. didn't iou xet marjed in a t͡ʃuɾt͡ʃ?"

"tat was a lonɡ time aɡo."

te effoɾt of answeɾinɡ bɾoke te ɾitm of ʝs ɾokkinɡ--foɾ a moment e
was silent. ten te same alf knowinɡ, alf bewildeɾed look kame bakk
into ʝs faded eies.

"look in te dɾaweɾ teɾe," e said, pointinɡ at te desk.

"wʝt͡ʃ dɾaweɾ?"

"tat dɾaweɾ--tat one."

mit͡ʃaelis opened te dɾaweɾ neaɾest ʝs and. teɾe was notʝnɡ in it but
a smaʝ ekspensibe doɡ leaʃ made of leateɾ and bɾaided silbeɾ. it was
appaɾent͡ɬi new.

"tʝs?" e inkiɾed, oldinɡ it up.

wilson staɾed and nodded.

"i found it iesteɾdai afteɾnoon. ʃe tɾjed to teʝ me about it but i
knew it was sometʝnɡ funni."

"iou mean iouɾ wife bouɡt it?"

"ʃe ad it wɾapped in tisswe papeɾ on eɾ buɾeau."

mit͡ʃaelis didn't see anitʝnɡ odd in tat and e ɡabe wilson a dosen
ɾeasons wi ʝs wife miɡt abe bouɡt te doɡ leaʃ. but konseibabli
wilson ad eaɾd some of tese same eksplanatjons befoɾe, fɾom miɾt͡ɬe,
bekause e beɡan saiinɡ "o, mi ɡod!" aɡain in a wʝspeɾ--ʝs komfoɾteɾ
left sebeɾal eksplanatjons in te aiɾ.

"ten e kiʝed eɾ," said wilson. ʝs mout dɾopped open suddenli.

"wo did?"

"i abe a wai of findinɡ out."

"iou'ɾe moɾbid, xeoɾxe," said ʝs fɾjend. "tʝs as been a stɾain to iou
and iou don't know wat iou'ɾe saiinɡ. iou'd betteɾ tɾi and sit kjet
tiʝ moɾninɡ."

"e muɾdeɾed eɾ."

"it was an aksident, xeoɾxe."

wilson ʃook ʝs ead. ʝs eies narowed and ʝs mout widened sliɡt͡ɬi
wit te ɡost of a supeɾjoɾ "m!"

"i know," e said definiteli, "i'm one of tese tɾustinɡ feʝas and i
don't tʝnk ani aɾm to nobodi, but wen i xet to know a tʝnɡ i know
it. it was te man in tat kaɾ. ʃe ɾan out to speak to ʝm and e
wouldn't stop."

mit͡ʃaelis ad seen tʝs too but it adn't okkured to ʝm tat teɾe was
ani spesial siɡnifikanse in it. e beljebed tat mɾs. wilson ad been
ɾunninɡ awai fɾom eɾ wsband, ɾateɾ tan tɾiinɡ to stop ani
paɾtikulaɾ kaɾ.

"ow kould ʃe of been like tat?"

"ʃe's a deep one," said wilson, as if tat answeɾed te kestjon.
"a------"

e beɡan to ɾokk aɡain and mit͡ʃaelis stood twistinɡ te leaʃ in
ʝs and.

"maibe iou ɡot some fɾjend tat i kould telepone foɾ, xeoɾxe?"

tʝs was a foɾloɾn ope--e was almost suɾe tat wilson ad no fɾjend:
teɾe was not enouɡ of ʝm foɾ ʝs wife. e was ɡlad a litt͡ɬe lateɾ wen
e notised a t͡ʃanxe in te ɾoom, a blwe kikkeninɡ bi te window, and
ɾealised tat dawn wasn't faɾ off. about fibe o'klokk it was blwe enouɡ
outside to snap off te liɡt.

wilson's ɡlased eies tuɾned out to te aʃeaps, weɾe smaʝ ɡɾei
klouds took on fantastik ʃape and skurjed eɾe and teɾe in te faint
dawn wind.

"i spoke to eɾ," e mutteɾed, afteɾ a lonɡ silense. "i told eɾ ʃe miɡt
fool me but ʃe kouldn't fool ɡod. i took eɾ to te window--" wit an
effoɾt e ɡot up and walked to te ɾeaɾ window and leaned wit ʝs fase
pɾessed aɡainst it, "--and i said 'ɡod knows wat iou'be been doinɡ,
ebeɾitʝnɡ iou'be been doinɡ. iou mai fool me but iou kan't fool ɡod!' "

standinɡ beʝnd ʝm mit͡ʃaelis saw wit a ʃokk tat e was lookinɡ at te
eies of doktoɾ t. x. ekklebuɾɡ wʝt͡ʃ ad xust emeɾxed pale and enoɾmous
fɾom te dissolbinɡ niɡt.

"ɡod sees ebeɾitʝnɡ," ɾepeated wilson.

"tat's an adbeɾtisement," mit͡ʃaelis assuɾed ʝm. sometʝnɡ made ʝm tuɾn
awai fɾom te window and look bakk into te ɾoom. but wilson stood teɾe a
lonɡ time, ʝs fase klose to te window pane, noddinɡ into te twiliɡt.


bi siks o'klokk mit͡ʃaelis was woɾn out and ɡɾateful foɾ te sound of a
kaɾ stoppinɡ outside. it was one of te watt͡ʃeɾs of te niɡt befoɾe
wo ad pɾomised to kome bakk so e kooked bɾeakfast foɾ tɾee wʝt͡ʃ
e and te oteɾ man ate toxeteɾ. wilson was kjeteɾ now and mit͡ʃaelis
went ome to sleep; wen e awoke fouɾ ouɾs lateɾ and wrjed bakk to te
ɡaɾaxe wilson was ɡone.

ʝs mobements--e was on foot aʝ te time--weɾe afteɾwaɾd tɾased to poɾt
ɾoosebelt and ten to ɡad's ʝʝ weɾe e bouɡt a sandwit͡ʃ tat e
didn't eat and a kup of koffee. e must abe been tiɾed and walkinɡ
slowli foɾ e didn't ɾeat͡ʃ ɡad's ʝʝ until noon. tws faɾ teɾe was
no diffikulti in akkountinɡ foɾ ʝs time--teɾe weɾe bois wo ad seen a
man "aktinɡ soɾt of kɾasi" and motoɾists at wom e staɾed oddli fɾom
te side of te ɾoad. ten foɾ tɾee ouɾs e disappeaɾed fɾom bjew.
te polise, on te stɾenɡt of wat e said to mit͡ʃaelis, tat e "ad
a wai of findinɡ out," supposed tat e spent tat time ɡoinɡ fɾom
ɡaɾaxe to ɡaɾaxe teɾeabouts inkiɾinɡ foɾ a ieʝow kaɾ. on te oteɾ
and no ɡaɾaxe man wo ad seen ʝm ebeɾ kame foɾwaɾd--and peɾaps e
ad an easjeɾ, suɾeɾ wai of findinɡ out wat e wanted to know. bi
alf past two e was in west eɡɡ weɾe e asked someone te wai to
ɡatsbi's ouse. so bi tat time e knew ɡatsbi's name.


at two o'klokk ɡatsbi put on ʝs batʝnɡ swit and left woɾd wit te
but͡ɬeɾ tat if ani one poned woɾd was to be bɾouɡt to ʝm at te
pool. e stopped at te ɡaɾaxe foɾ a pneumatik mattɾess tat ad amused
ʝs ɡests duɾinɡ te summeɾ, and te t͡ʃauffeuɾ elped ʝm pump it up.
ten e ɡabe instɾuktjons tat te open kaɾ wasn't to be taken out
undeɾ ani siɾkumstanses--and tʝs was stɾanxe bekause te fɾont ɾiɡt
fendeɾ needed ɾepaiɾ.

ɡatsbi ʃouldeɾed te mattɾess and staɾted foɾ te pool. onse e
stopped and ʃifted it a litt͡ɬe, and te t͡ʃauffeuɾ asked ʝm if e
needed elp, but e ʃook ʝs ead and in a moment disappeaɾed amonɡ
te ieʝowinɡ tɾees.

no telepone messaxe aribed but te but͡ɬeɾ went witout ʝs sleep and
waited foɾ it until fouɾ o'klokk--until lonɡ afteɾ teɾe was ani one to
xibe it to if it kame. i abe an idea tat ɡatsbi ʝmself didn't
beljebe it would kome and peɾaps e no lonxeɾ kaɾed. if tat was tɾwe
e must abe felt tat e ad lost te old waɾm woɾld, paid a ʝɡ
pɾise foɾ libinɡ too lonɡ wit a sinɡle dɾeam. e must abe looked up
at an unfamiljaɾ ski tɾouɡ fɾiɡteninɡ leabes and ʃibeɾed as e
found wat a ɡɾoteske tʝnɡ a ɾose is and ow ɾaw te sunliɡt was
upon te skaɾseli kɾeated ɡɾass. a new woɾld, mateɾjal witout beinɡ
ɾeal, weɾe pooɾ ɡosts, bɾeatʝnɡ dɾeams like aiɾ, dɾifted
foɾtwitousli about . . . like tat aʃen, fantastik fiɡwɾe ɡlidinɡ towaɾd
ʝm tɾouɡ te amoɾpous tɾees.

te t͡ʃauffeuɾ--e was one of wolfʃjem's pɾotexes--eaɾd te
ʃots--afteɾwaɾd e kould onli sai tat e adn't touɡt anitʝnɡ mut͡ʃ
about tem. i dɾobe fɾom te statjon diɾekt͡ɬi to ɡatsbi's ouse and mi
ɾuʃinɡ anksjousli up te fɾont steps was te fiɾst tʝnɡ tat alaɾmed ani
one. but tei knew ten, i fiɾmli beljebe. wit skaɾseli a woɾd said, fouɾ
of us, te t͡ʃauffeuɾ, but͡ɬeɾ, ɡaɾdeneɾ and i, wrjed down to te pool.

teɾe was a faint, baɾeli peɾseptible mobement of te wateɾ as te
fɾeʃ flow fɾom one end uɾxed its wai towaɾd te dɾain at te oteɾ.
wit litt͡ɬe ɾipples tat weɾe aɾdli te ʃadows of wabes, te laden
mattɾess mobed ireɡwlaɾli down te pool. a smaʝ ɡwst of wind tat
skaɾseli koruɡated te suɾfase was enouɡ to distuɾb its aksidental
kouɾse wit its aksidental buɾden. te tout͡ʃ of a klusteɾ of leabes
ɾebolbed it slowli, tɾasinɡ, like te leɡ of kompass, a tʝn ɾed siɾkle
in te wateɾ.

it was afteɾ we staɾted wit ɡatsbi towaɾd te ouse tat te ɡaɾdeneɾ
saw wilson's bodi a litt͡ɬe wai off in te ɡɾass, and te olokaust was
komplete.




t͡ʃapteɾ 9



afteɾ two ieaɾs i ɾemembeɾ te ɾest of tat dai, and tat niɡt and te
nekst dai, onli as an endless dɾiʝ of polise and potoɡɾapeɾs and
newspapeɾ men in and out of ɡatsbi's fɾont dooɾ. a ɾope stɾett͡ʃed
akɾoss te main ɡate and a poliseman bi it kept out te kuɾjous, but
litt͡ɬe bois soon diskobeɾed tat tei kould enteɾ tɾouɡ mi iaɾd and
teɾe weɾe alwais a few of tem klusteɾed open-mouted about te pool.
someone wit a positibe manneɾ, peɾaps a detektibe, used te
ekspɾessjon "mad man" as e bent obeɾ wilson's bodi tat afteɾnoon, and
te adbentitjous autoɾiti of ʝs boise set te kei foɾ te newspapeɾ
ɾepoɾts nekst moɾninɡ.

most of tose ɾepoɾts weɾe a niɡtmaɾe--ɡɾoteske, siɾkumstantjal,
eaxeɾ and untɾwe. wen mit͡ʃaelis's testimoni at te inkest bɾouɡt to
liɡt wilson's suspisions of ʝs wife i touɡt te wole tale would
ʃoɾt͡ɬi be seɾbed up in ɾaki paskinade--but kateɾine, wo miɡt abe
said anitʝnɡ, didn't sai a woɾd. ʃe ʃowed a suɾpɾisinɡ amount of
t͡ʃaɾakteɾ about it too--looked at te koɾoneɾ wit deteɾmined eies undeɾ
tat korekted bɾow of eɾs and swoɾe tat eɾ sisteɾ ad nebeɾ seen
ɡatsbi, tat eɾ sisteɾ was kompleteli appi wit eɾ wsband, tat eɾ
sisteɾ ad been into no mist͡ʃjef watebeɾ. ʃe konbinsed eɾself of it
and kɾjed into eɾ andkeɾt͡ʃjef as if te beɾi suɡxestjon was moɾe
tan ʃe kould enduɾe. so wilson was ɾedused to a man "deɾanxed bi
ɡɾjef" in oɾdeɾ tat te kase miɡt ɾemain in its simplest foɾm. and
it ɾested teɾe.

but aʝ tʝs paɾt of it seemed ɾemote and unessentjal. i found miself on
ɡatsbi's side, and alone. fɾom te moment i teleponed news of
te katastɾope to west eɡɡ biʝaxe, ebeɾi suɾmise about ʝm, and
ebeɾi pɾaktikal kestjon, was ɾefered to me. at fiɾst i was suɾpɾised and
konfused; ten, as e lai in ʝs ouse and didn't mobe oɾ bɾeate oɾ
speak ouɾ upon ouɾ it ɡɾew upon me tat i was ɾesponsible, bekause no
one else was inteɾested--inteɾested, i mean, wit tat intense peɾsonal
inteɾest to wʝt͡ʃ ebeɾi one as some baɡe ɾiɡt at te end.

i kaʝed up daisi alf an ouɾ afteɾ we found ʝm, kaʝed eɾ
instinktibeli and witout esitatjon. but ʃe and tom ad ɡone awai
eaɾli tat afteɾnoon, and taken baɡɡaxe wit tem.

"left no addɾess?"

"no."

"sai wen tei'd be bakk?"

"no."

"ani idea weɾe tei aɾe? ow i kould ɾeat͡ʃ tem?"

"i don't know. kan't sai."

i wanted to xet somebodi foɾ ʝm. i wanted to ɡo into te ɾoom weɾe e
lai and ɾeassuɾe ʝm: "i'ʝ xet somebodi foɾ iou, ɡatsbi. don't wori.
xust tɾust me and i'ʝ xet somebodi foɾ iou----"

meieɾ wolfʃjem's name wasn't in te pone book. te but͡ɬeɾ ɡabe me ʝs
offise addɾess on bɾoadwai and i kaʝed infoɾmatjon, but bi te time i
ad te numbeɾ it was lonɡ afteɾ fibe and no one answeɾed te pone.

"wiʝ iou ɾinɡ aɡain?"

"i'be ɾunɡ tem tɾee times."

"it's beɾi impoɾtant."

"sori. i'm afɾaid no one's teɾe."

i went bakk to te dɾawinɡ ɾoom and touɡt foɾ an instant tat tei weɾe
t͡ʃanse bisitoɾs, aʝ tese offisial people wo suddenli fiʝed it. but
as tei dɾew bakk te ʃeet and looked at ɡatsbi wit unmobed eies,
ʝs pɾotest kontinwed in mi bɾain.

"look eɾe, old spoɾt, iou'be ɡot to xet somebodi foɾ me. iou'be ɡot
to tɾi aɾd. i kan't ɡo tɾouɡ tʝs alone."

some one staɾted to ask me kestjons but i bɾoke awai and ɡoinɡ upstaiɾs
looked astili tɾouɡ te unlokked paɾts of ʝs desk--e'd nebeɾ told me
definiteli tat ʝs paɾents weɾe dead. but teɾe was notʝnɡ--onli te
piktuɾe of dan kodi, a token of foɾɡotten bjolense staɾinɡ down fɾom
te waʝ.

nekst moɾninɡ i sent te but͡ɬeɾ to new ioɾk wit a letteɾ to wolfʃjem
wʝt͡ʃ asked foɾ infoɾmatjon and uɾxed ʝm to kome out on te nekst
tɾain. tat ɾekest seemed supeɾflwous wen i wɾote it. i was suɾe e'd
staɾt wen e saw te newspapeɾs, xust as i was suɾe teɾe'd be a wiɾe
fɾom daisi befoɾe noon--but neiteɾ a wiɾe noɾ mɾ. wolfʃjem aribed, no
one aribed ekssept moɾe polise and potoɡɾapeɾs and newspapeɾ men.
wen te but͡ɬeɾ bɾouɡt bakk wolfʃjem's answeɾ i beɡan to abe a
feelinɡ of defjanse, of skoɾnful solidaɾiti between ɡatsbi and me
aɡainst tem aʝ.


_deaɾ mɾ. karawai. tʝs as been one of te most terible ʃokks of mi
life to me i aɾdli kan beljebe it tat it is tɾwe at aʝ. sut͡ʃ a mad
akt as tat man did ʃould make us aʝ tʝnk. i kannot kome down now as
i am tjed up in some beɾi impoɾtant business and kannot xet miksed up in
tʝs tʝnɡ now. if teɾe is anitʝnɡ i kan do a litt͡ɬe lateɾ let me
know in a letteɾ bi edɡaɾ. i aɾdli know weɾe i am wen i eaɾ about a
tʝnɡ like tʝs and am kompleteli knokked down and out.

                                        iouɾs tɾuli
                                                      meieɾ wolfʃjem_

and ten asti addenda beneat:

_let me know about te funeɾal etk do not know ʝs famili at aʝ._


wen te pone ɾanɡ tat afteɾnoon and lonɡ distanse said t͡ʃikaɡo was
kaʝinɡ i touɡt tʝs would be daisi at last. but te konnektjon kame
tɾouɡ as a man's boise, beɾi tʝn and faɾ awai.

"tʝs is slaɡle speakinɡ. . . ."

"ies?" te name was unfamiljaɾ.

"eʝ of a note, isn't it? xet mi wiɾe?"

"teɾe aben't been ani wiɾes."

"iounɡ paɾke's in tɾouble," e said ɾapidli. "tei pikked ʝm up wen e
anded te bonds obeɾ te kounteɾ. tei ɡot a siɾkulaɾ fɾom new ioɾk
xibinɡ 'em te numbeɾs xust fibe minutes befoɾe. wat d'iou know about
tat, ei? iou nebeɾ kan teʝ in tese ʝkk towns----"

"eʝo!" i interupted bɾeatlessli. "look eɾe--tʝs isn't mɾ. ɡatsbi.
mɾ. ɡatsbi's dead."

teɾe was a lonɡ silense on te oteɾ end of te wiɾe, foʝowed bi an
eksklamatjon . . . ten a kikk skawk as te konnektjon was bɾoken.


i tʝnk it was on te tʝɾd dai tat a teleɡɾam siɡned enɾi k. ɡat͡s
aribed fɾom a town in minnesota. it said onli tat te sendeɾ was
leabinɡ immedjateli and to postpone te funeɾal until e kame.

it was ɡatsbi's fateɾ, a solemn old man beɾi elpless and dismaied,
bundled up in a lonɡ t͡ʃeap ulsteɾ aɡainst te waɾm septembeɾ dai. ʝs
eies leaked kontinwousli wit ekssitement and wen i took te baɡ and
umbɾeʝa fɾom ʝs ands e beɡan to puʝ so insessant͡ɬi at ʝs spaɾse
ɡɾei beaɾd tat i ad diffikulti in xettinɡ off ʝs koat. e was on te
point of koʝapse so i took ʝm into te musik ɾoom and made ʝm sit
down wʝle i sent foɾ sometʝnɡ to eat. but e wouldn't eat and te
ɡlass of milk spiʝed fɾom ʝs tɾemblinɡ and.

"i saw it in te t͡ʃikaɡo newspapeɾ," e said. "it was aʝ in te t͡ʃikaɡo
newspapeɾ. i staɾted ɾiɡt awai."

"i didn't know ow to ɾeat͡ʃ iou."

ʝs eies, seeinɡ notʝnɡ, mobed seaselessli about te ɾoom.

"it was a mad man," e said. "e must abe been mad."

"wouldn't iou like some koffee?" i uɾxed ʝm.

"i don't want anitʝnɡ. i'm aʝ ɾiɡt now, mɾ.----"

"karawai."

"weʝ, i'm aʝ ɾiɡt now. weɾe abe tei ɡot ximmi?"

i took ʝm into te dɾawinɡ-ɾoom, weɾe ʝs son lai, and left ʝm teɾe.
some litt͡ɬe bois ad kome up on te steps and weɾe lookinɡ into te aʝ;
wen i told tem wo ad aribed tei went ɾeluktant͡ɬi awai.

afteɾ a litt͡ɬe wʝle mɾ. ɡat͡s opened te dooɾ and kame out, ʝs mout
axaɾ, ʝs fase fluʃed sliɡt͡ɬi, ʝs eies leakinɡ isolated and
unpunktwal teaɾs. e ad ɾeat͡ʃed an axe weɾe deat no lonxeɾ as te
kaliti of ɡast͡ɬi suɾpɾise, and wen e looked aɾound ʝm now foɾ te
fiɾst time and saw te eiɡt and splendoɾ of te aʝ and te ɡɾeat
ɾooms openinɡ out fɾom it into oteɾ ɾooms ʝs ɡɾjef beɡan to be miksed
wit an awed pɾide. i elped ʝm to a bedɾoom upstaiɾs; wʝle e took
off ʝs koat and best i told ʝm tat aʝ aranxements ad been
defered until e kame.

"i didn't know wat iou'd want, mɾ. ɡatsbi----"

"ɡat͡s is mi name."

"--mɾ. ɡat͡s. i touɡt iou miɡt want to take te bodi west."

e ʃook ʝs ead.

"ximmi alwais liked it betteɾ down east. e ɾose up to ʝs positjon in
te east. weɾe iou a fɾjend of mi boi's, mɾ.--?"

"we weɾe klose fɾjends."

"e ad a biɡ futuɾe befoɾe ʝm, iou know. e was onli a iounɡ man but
e ad a lot of bɾain poweɾ eɾe."

e tout͡ʃed ʝs ead impɾessibeli and i nodded.

"if e'd of libed e'd of been a ɡɾeat man. a man like xames x. ʝʝ.
e'd of elped bwild up te kountɾi."

"tat's tɾwe," i said, unkomfoɾtabli.

e fumbled at te embɾoideɾed kobeɾlet, tɾiinɡ to take it fɾom te bed,
and lai down stiffli--was instant͡ɬi asleep.

tat niɡt an obbjousli fɾiɡtened peɾson kaʝed up and demanded to know
wo i was befoɾe e would xibe ʝs name.

"tʝs is mɾ. karawai," i said.

"o--" e sounded ɾeljebed. "tʝs is klipspɾinxeɾ."

i was ɾeljebed too foɾ tat seemed to pɾomise anoteɾ fɾjend
at ɡatsbi's ɡɾabe. i didn't want it to be in te papeɾs and dɾaw
a siɡtseeinɡ kɾowd so i'd been kaʝinɡ up a few people miself.
tei weɾe aɾd to find.

"te funeɾal's tomorow," i said. "tɾee o'klokk, eɾe at te ouse.
i wiʃ iou'd teʝ anibodi wo'd be inteɾested."

"o, i wiʝ," e bɾoke out astili. "of kouɾse i'm not likeli to see
anibodi, but if i do."

ʝs tone made me suspisious.

"of kouɾse iou'ʝ be teɾe iouɾself."

"weʝ, i'ʝ seɾtainli tɾi. wat i kaʝed up about is----"

"wait a minute," i interupted. "ow about saiinɡ iou'ʝ kome?"

"weʝ, te fakt is--te tɾut of te matteɾ is tat i'm staiinɡ wit
some people up eɾe in ɡɾeenwit͡ʃ and tei ɾateɾ ekspekt me to be wit
tem tomorow. in fakt teɾe's a soɾt of piknik oɾ sometʝnɡ.
of kouɾse i'ʝ do mi beɾi best to xet awai."

i exakulated an unɾestɾained "w!" and e must abe eaɾd me foɾ e went
on neɾbousli:

"wat i kaʝed up about was a paiɾ of ʃoes i left teɾe. i wondeɾ if
it'd be too mut͡ʃ tɾouble to abe te but͡ɬeɾ send tem on. iou
see tei'ɾe tennis ʃoes and i'm soɾt of elpless witout tem. mi
addɾess is kaɾe of b. f.----"

i didn't eaɾ te ɾest of te name bekause i wnɡ up te ɾeseibeɾ.

afteɾ tat i felt a seɾtain ʃame foɾ ɡatsbi--one xent͡ɬeman to wom i
teleponed impljed tat e ad ɡot wat e deseɾbed. owebeɾ, tat was
mi fault, foɾ e was one of tose wo used to sneeɾ most bitteɾli at
ɡatsbi on te kouɾaxe of ɡatsbi's likoɾ and i ʃould abe known
betteɾ tan to kaʝ ʝm.

te moɾninɡ of te funeɾal i went up to new ioɾk to see meieɾ
wolfʃjem; i kouldn't seem to ɾeat͡ʃ ʝm ani oteɾ wai. te dooɾ tat i
puʃed open on te adbise of an elebatoɾ boi was maɾked "te swastika
oldinɡ kompani" and at fiɾst teɾe didn't seem to be ani one inside.
but wen i'd ʃouted "eʝo" sebeɾal times in bain an aɾɡwment bɾoke
out beʝnd a paɾtitjon and pɾesent͡ɬi a lobeli xewess appeaɾed at an
inteɾjoɾ dooɾ and skɾutinised me wit blakk ostile eies.

"nobodi's in," ʃe said. "mɾ. wolfʃjem's ɡone to t͡ʃikaɡo."

te fiɾst paɾt of tʝs was obbjousli untɾwe foɾ someone ad beɡwn to
wʝst͡ɬe "te ɾosaɾi," tunelessli, inside.

"please sai tat mɾ. karawai wants to see ʝm."

"i kan't xet ʝm bakk fɾom t͡ʃikaɡo, kan i?"

at tʝs moment a boise, unmistakabli wolfʃjem's kaʝed "steʝa!"
fɾom te oteɾ side of te dooɾ.

"leabe iouɾ name on te desk," ʃe said kikkli. "i'ʝ xibe it to ʝm
wen e xets bakk."

"but i know e's teɾe."

ʃe took a step towaɾd me and beɡan to slide eɾ ands indiɡnant͡ɬi up
and down eɾ ʝps.

"iou iounɡ men tʝnk iou kan foɾse iouɾ wai in eɾe ani time," ʃe
skolded. "we'ɾe xettinɡ sikkantiɾed of it. wen i sai e's in t͡ʃikaɡo,
e's in t͡ʃikaɡo."

i mentjoned ɡatsbi.

"o--!" ʃe looked at me obeɾ aɡain. "wiʝ iou xust--wat was iouɾ name?"

ʃe baniʃed. in a moment meieɾ wolfʃjem stood solemnli in te dooɾwai,
oldinɡ out bot ands. e dɾew me into ʝs offise, ɾemaɾkinɡ in a
ɾebeɾent boise tat it was a sad time foɾ aʝ of us, and offeɾed me
a siɡaɾ.

"mi memoɾi ɡoes bakk to wen i fiɾst met ʝm," e said. "a iounɡ
maxoɾ xust out of te aɾmi and kobeɾed obeɾ wit medals e ɡot
in te waɾ. e was so aɾd up e ad to keep on weaɾinɡ ʝs unifoɾm
bekause e kouldn't bui some ɾeɡwlaɾ klotes. fiɾst time i saw ʝm was
wen e kome into winebɾenneɾ's poolɾoom at foɾti-tʝɾd stɾeet and
asked foɾ a xob. e adn't eat anitʝnɡ foɾ a kouple of dais. 'kome on
abe some lunt͡ʃ wit me,' i sid. e ate moɾe tan fouɾ doʝaɾs' woɾt of
food in alf an ouɾ."

"did iou staɾt ʝm in business?" i inkiɾed.

"staɾt ʝm! i made ʝm."

"o."

"i ɾaised ʝm up out of notʝnɡ, ɾiɡt out of te ɡwtteɾ. i saw ɾiɡt
awai e was a fine appeaɾinɡ, xent͡ɬemanli iounɡ man, and wen e told
me e was an oɡɡsfoɾd i knew i kould use ʝm ɡood. i ɡot ʝm to xoin up
in te ameɾikan lexion and e used to stand ʝɡ teɾe. ɾiɡt off e
did some woɾk foɾ a kljent of mine up to albani. we weɾe so tʝkk like
tat in ebeɾitʝnɡ--" e eld up two bulbous finxeɾs "--alwais
toxeteɾ."

i wondeɾed if tʝs paɾtneɾʃip ad inkluded te woɾld's seɾjes tɾansaktjon
in 1919.

"now e's dead," i said afteɾ a moment. "iou weɾe ʝs klosest fɾjend,
so i know iou'ʝ want to kome to ʝs funeɾal tʝs afteɾnoon."

"i'd like to kome."

"weʝ, kome ten."

te aiɾ in ʝs nostɾils kibeɾed sliɡt͡ɬi and as e ʃook ʝs ead ʝs
eies fiʝed wit teaɾs.

"i kan't do it--i kan't xet miksed up in it," e said.

"teɾe's notʝnɡ to xet miksed up in. it's aʝ obeɾ now."

"wen a man xets kiʝed i nebeɾ like to xet miksed up in it in ani wai.
i keep out. wen i was a iounɡ man it was diffeɾent--if a fɾjend of mine
djed, no matteɾ ow, i stukk wit tem to te end. iou mai tʝnk tat's
sentimental but i mean it--to te bitteɾ end."

i saw tat foɾ some ɾeason of ʝs own e was deteɾmined not to kome,
so i stood up.

"aɾe iou a koʝexe man?" e inkiɾed suddenli.

foɾ a moment i touɡt e was ɡoinɡ to suɡxest a "ɡonneɡtjon" but e
onli nodded and ʃook mi and.

"let us leaɾn to ʃow ouɾ fɾjendʃip foɾ a man wen e is alibe and not
afteɾ e is dead," e suɡxested. "afteɾ tat mi own ɾule is to let
ebeɾitʝnɡ alone."

wen i left ʝs offise te ski ad tuɾned daɾk and i ɡot bakk to west eɡɡ
in a dɾissle. afteɾ t͡ʃanxinɡ mi klotes i went nekst dooɾ and found
mɾ. ɡat͡s walkinɡ up and down ekssitedli in te aʝ. ʝs pɾide in ʝs
son and in ʝs son's possessjons was kontinwaʝi inkɾeasinɡ and now e
ad sometʝnɡ to ʃow me.

"ximmi sent me tʝs piktuɾe." e took out ʝs waʝet wit tɾemblinɡ
finxeɾs. "look teɾe."

it was a potoɡɾap of te ouse, kɾakked in te koɾneɾs and diɾti wit
mani ands. e pointed out ebeɾi detail to me eaxeɾli. "look teɾe!" and
ten souɡt admiɾatjon fɾom mi eies. e ad ʃown it so often tat i tʝnk
it was moɾe ɾeal to ʝm now tan te ouse itself.

"ximmi sent it to me. i tʝnk it's a beɾi pɾetti piktuɾe. it ʃows up
weʝ."

"beɾi weʝ. ad iou seen ʝm lateli?"

"e kome out to see me two ieaɾs aɡo and bouɡt me te ouse i libe in
now. of kouɾse we was bɾoke up wen e ɾun off fɾom ome but i see now
teɾe was a ɾeason foɾ it. e knew e ad a biɡ futuɾe in fɾont of ʝm.
and ebeɾ sinse e made a suksess e was beɾi xeneɾous wit me."

e seemed ɾeluktant to put awai te piktuɾe, eld it foɾ anoteɾ minute,
linxeɾinɡli, befoɾe mi eies. ten e ɾetuɾned te waʝet and puʝed fɾom
ʝs pokket a ɾaɡxed old kopi of a book kaʝed "opalonɡ kassidi."

"look eɾe, tʝs is a book e ad wen e was a boi. it xust ʃows
iou."

e opened it at te bakk kobeɾ and tuɾned it aɾound foɾ me to see.
on te last fli-leaf was pɾinted te woɾd st͡ʃedule, and te date
septembeɾ 12t, 1906. and undeɾneat:


ɾise fɾom bed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6.00       a.m.
dumbbeʝ ekseɾsise and waʝ-skalinɡ . . . . . . 6.15-6.30   "
studi elektɾisiti, etk . . . . . . . . . . . . 7.15-8.15   "
woɾk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8.30-4.30  p.m.
basebaʝ and spoɾts . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4.30-5.00   "
pɾaktise elokutjon, poise and ow to attain it 5.00-6.00   "
studi needed inbentjons . . . . . . . . . . .  7.00-9.00   "

                xeneɾal ɾesolbes

no wastinɡ time at ʃafteɾs oɾ [a name, indesipeɾable]
no moɾe smokeinɡ oɾ t͡ʃewinɡ
bat ebeɾi oteɾ dai
ɾead one impɾobinɡ book oɾ maɡasine peɾ week
sabe $5.00 [kɾossed out] $3.00 peɾ week
be betteɾ to paɾents


"i kome akɾoss tʝs book bi aksident," said te old man. "it xust ʃows
iou, don't it?"

"it xust ʃows iou."

"ximmi was bound to xet aead. e alwais ad some ɾesolbes like tʝs oɾ
sometʝnɡ. do iou notise wat e's ɡot about impɾobinɡ ʝs mind? e was
alwais ɡɾeat foɾ tat. e told me i et like a oɡ onse and i beat ʝm
foɾ it."

e was ɾeluktant to klose te book, ɾeadinɡ eat͡ʃ item aloud and ten
lookinɡ eaxeɾli at me. i tʝnk e ɾateɾ ekspekted me to kopi down te
list foɾ mi own use.

a litt͡ɬe befoɾe tɾee te luteɾan ministeɾ aribed fɾom fluʃinɡ and
i beɡan to look inboluntaɾili out te windows foɾ oteɾ kaɾs. so did
ɡatsbi's fateɾ. and as te time passed and te seɾbants kame in and
stood waitinɡ in te aʝ, ʝs eies beɡan to blink anksjousli and e
spoke of te ɾain in a worjed unseɾtain wai. te ministeɾ ɡlansed
sebeɾal times at ʝs watt͡ʃ so i took ʝm aside and asked ʝm to wait
foɾ alf an ouɾ. but it wasn't ani use. nobodi kame.


about fibe o'klokk ouɾ pɾosessjon of tɾee kaɾs ɾeat͡ʃed te semeteɾi
and stopped in a tʝkk dɾissle beside te ɡate--fiɾst a motoɾ eaɾse,
oribli blakk and wet, ten mɾ. ɡat͡s and te ministeɾ and i in te
limousine, and, a litt͡ɬe lateɾ, fouɾ oɾ fibe seɾbants and te postman
fɾom west eɡɡ in ɡatsbi's statjon waɡon, aʝ wet to te skin. as we
staɾted tɾouɡ te ɡate into te semeteɾi i eaɾd a kaɾ stop and ten
te sound of someone splaʃinɡ afteɾ us obeɾ te soɡɡi ɡɾound. i looked
aɾound. it was te man wit owl-eied ɡlasses wom i ad found
maɾbeʝinɡ obeɾ ɡatsbi's books in te libɾaɾi one niɡt tɾee monts
befoɾe.

i'd nebeɾ seen ʝm sinse ten. i don't know ow e knew about te
funeɾal oɾ eben ʝs name. te ɾain pouɾed down ʝs tʝkk ɡlasses and
e took tem off and wiped tem to see te pɾotektinɡ kanbas unɾoʝed
fɾom ɡatsbi's ɡɾabe.

i tɾjed to tʝnk about ɡatsbi ten foɾ a moment but e was alɾeadi too
faɾ awai and i kould onli ɾemembeɾ, witout ɾesentment, tat daisi
adn't sent a messaxe oɾ a floweɾ. dimli i eaɾd someone muɾmuɾ
"blessed aɾe te dead tat te ɾain faʝs on," and ten te owl-eied
man said "amen to tat," in a bɾabe boise.

we stɾaɡɡled down kikkli tɾouɡ te ɾain to te kaɾs. owl-eies spoke
to me bi te ɡate.

"i kouldn't xet to te ouse," e ɾemaɾked.

"neiteɾ kould anibodi else."

"ɡo on!" e staɾted. "wi, mi ɡod! tei used to ɡo teɾe bi te
wndɾeds."

e took off ʝs ɡlasses and wiped tem aɡain outside and in.

"te pooɾ son-of-a-bitt͡ʃ," e said.


one of mi most bibid memoɾjes is of kominɡ bakk west fɾom pɾep st͡ʃool
and lateɾ fɾom koʝexe at t͡ʃɾistmas time. tose wo went faɾteɾ tan
t͡ʃikaɡo would ɡateɾ in te old dim unjon statjon at siks o'klokk of a
desembeɾ ebeninɡ wit a few t͡ʃikaɡo fɾjends alɾeadi kauɡt up into
teiɾ own olidai ɡaietjes to bid tem a asti ɡoodbie. i ɾemembeɾ
te fuɾ koats of te xiɾls ɾetuɾninɡ fɾom miss tʝs oɾ tat's and
te t͡ʃatteɾ of fɾosen bɾeat and te ands wabinɡ obeɾead as
we kauɡt siɡt of old akkaintanses and te matt͡ʃinɡs of inbitatjons:
"aɾe iou ɡoinɡ to te oɾdwais'? te eɾseis'? te st͡ʃult͡ses'?"
and te lonɡ ɡɾeen tikkets klasped tiɡt in ouɾ ɡlobed ands.
and last te muɾki ieʝow kaɾs of te t͡ʃikaɡo, milwaukee and st. paul
ɾailɾoad lookinɡ t͡ʃeeɾful as t͡ʃɾistmas itself on te tɾakks beside
te ɡate.

wen we puʝed out into te winteɾ niɡt and te ɾeal snow, ouɾ snow,
beɡan to stɾett͡ʃ out beside us and twinkle aɡainst te windows, and te
dim liɡts of smaʝ wiskonsin statjons mobed bi, a ʃaɾp wild bɾase
kame suddenli into te aiɾ. we dɾew in deep bɾeats of it as we walked
bakk fɾom dinneɾ tɾouɡ te kold bestibules, unutteɾabli awaɾe of ouɾ
identiti wit tʝs kountɾi foɾ one stɾanxe ouɾ befoɾe we melted
indistinɡiʃabli into it aɡain.

tat's mi middle west--not te weat oɾ te pɾaiɾjes oɾ te lost swede
towns but te tɾiʝinɡ, ɾetuɾninɡ tɾains of mi iout and te stɾeet
lamps and sleiɡ beʝs in te fɾosti daɾk and te ʃadows of oʝi
wɾeats tɾown bi liɡted windows on te snow. i am paɾt of tat, a
litt͡ɬe solemn wit te feel of tose lonɡ winteɾs, a litt͡ɬe komplasent
fɾom ɡɾowinɡ up in te karawai ouse in a siti weɾe dweʝinɡs aɾe
stiʝ kaʝed tɾouɡ dekades bi a famili's name. i see now tat tʝs
as been a stoɾi of te west, afteɾ aʝ--tom and ɡatsbi, daisi and
xoɾdan and i, weɾe aʝ westeɾneɾs, and peɾaps we possessed some
defisienki in kommon wʝt͡ʃ made us subt͡ɬi unadaptable to easteɾn life.

eben wen te east ekssited me most, eben wen i was most keenli awaɾe
of its supeɾjoɾiti to te boɾed, spɾawlinɡ, swoʝen towns beiond te
oʝo, wit teiɾ inteɾminable inkisitjons wʝt͡ʃ spaɾed onli te
t͡ʃildɾen and te beɾi old--eben ten it ad alwais foɾ me a kaliti of
distoɾtjon. west eɡɡ espesiaʝi stiʝ fiɡwɾes in mi moɾe fantastik
dɾeams. i see it as a niɡt ssene bi el ɡɾeko: a wndɾed ouses, at
onse konbentjonal and ɡɾoteske, kɾout͡ʃinɡ undeɾ a suʝen, obeɾanxinɡ
ski and a lustɾeless moon. in te foɾeɡɾound fouɾ solemn men in dɾess
swits aɾe walkinɡ alonɡ te sidewalk wit a stɾett͡ʃeɾ on wʝt͡ʃ ljes a
dɾunken woman in a wʝte ebeninɡ dɾess. eɾ and, wʝt͡ʃ danɡles obeɾ
te side, spaɾkles kold wit xewels. ɡɾabeli te men tuɾn in at a
ouse--te wɾonɡ ouse. but no one knows te woman's name, and no one
kaɾes.

afteɾ ɡatsbi's deat te east was aunted foɾ me like tat, distoɾted
beiond mi eies' poweɾ of korektjon. so wen te blwe smoke of bɾitt͡ɬe
leabes was in te aiɾ and te wind blew te wet laundɾi stiff on te
line i desided to kome bakk ome.

teɾe was one tʝnɡ to be done befoɾe i left, an awkwaɾd, unpleasant
tʝnɡ tat peɾaps ad betteɾ abe been let alone. but i wanted to
leabe tʝnɡs in oɾdeɾ and not xust tɾust tat oblixinɡ and indiffeɾent
sea to sweep mi ɾefuse awai. i saw xoɾdan bakeɾ and talked obeɾ and
aɾound wat ad appened to us toxeteɾ and wat ad appened
afteɾwaɾd to me, and ʃe lai peɾfekt͡ɬi stiʝ listeninɡ in a biɡ
t͡ʃaiɾ.

ʃe was dɾessed to plai ɡolf and i ɾemembeɾ tʝnkinɡ ʃe looked like a
ɡood iʝustɾatjon, eɾ t͡ʃin ɾaised a litt͡ɬe, xauntili, eɾ aiɾ te
koloɾ of an autumn leaf, eɾ fase te same bɾown tint as te finxeɾless
ɡlobe on eɾ knee. wen i ad finiʃed ʃe told me witout komment tat
ʃe was enɡaxed to anoteɾ man. i doubted tat touɡ teɾe weɾe
sebeɾal ʃe kould abe marjed at a nod of eɾ ead but i pɾetended to
be suɾpɾised. foɾ xust a minute i wondeɾed if i wasn't makinɡ a
mistake, ten i touɡt it aʝ obeɾ aɡain kikkli and ɡot up to sai
ɡoodbie.

"nebeɾteless iou did tɾow me obeɾ," said xoɾdan suddenli. "iou tɾew me
obeɾ on te telepone. i don't xibe a damn about iou now but it was a
new ekspeɾjense foɾ me and i felt a litt͡ɬe dissi foɾ a wʝle."

we ʃook ands.

"o, and do iou ɾemembeɾ--" ʃe added, "----a konbeɾsatjon we ad onse
about dɾibinɡ a kaɾ?"

"wi--not eksakt͡ɬi."

"iou said a bad dɾibeɾ was onli safe until ʃe met anoteɾ bad dɾibeɾ?
weʝ, i met anoteɾ bad dɾibeɾ, didn't i? i mean it was kaɾeless of me
to make sut͡ʃ a wɾonɡ ɡess. i touɡt iou weɾe ɾateɾ an onest,
stɾaiɡtfoɾwaɾd peɾson. i touɡt it was iouɾ sekɾet pɾide."

"i'm tʝɾti," i said. "i'm fibe ieaɾs too old to lje to miself and kaʝ
it onoɾ."

ʃe didn't answeɾ. anɡɾi, and alf in lobe wit eɾ, and tɾemendousli
sori, i tuɾned awai.


one afteɾnoon late in oktobeɾ i saw tom but͡ʃanan. e was walkinɡ aead
of me alonɡ fift abenwe in ʝs aleɾt, aɡɡɾessibe wai, ʝs ands out a
litt͡ɬe fɾom ʝs bodi as if to fiɡt off inteɾfeɾense, ʝs ead mobinɡ
ʃaɾpli eɾe and teɾe, adaptinɡ itself to ʝs ɾest͡ɬess eies. xust as i
slowed up to aboid obeɾtakinɡ ʝm e stopped and beɡan fɾowninɡ into
te windows of a xewelɾi stoɾe. suddenli e saw me and walked bakk
oldinɡ out ʝs and.

"wat's te matteɾ, nikk? do iou obxekt to ʃakinɡ ands wit me?"

"ies. iou know wat i tʝnk of iou."

"iou'ɾe kɾasi, nikk," e said kikkli. "kɾasi as eʝ. i don't know
wat's te matteɾ wit iou."

"tom," i inkiɾed, "wat did iou sai to wilson tat afteɾnoon?"

e staɾed at me witout a woɾd and i knew i ad ɡessed ɾiɡt about
tose missinɡ ouɾs. i staɾted to tuɾn awai but e took a step afteɾ me
and ɡɾabbed mi aɾm.

"i told ʝm te tɾut," e said. "e kame to te dooɾ wʝle we weɾe
xettinɡ ɾeadi to leabe and wen i sent down woɾd tat we weɾen't in e
tɾjed to foɾse ʝs wai upstaiɾs. e was kɾasi enouɡ to kiʝ me if i
adn't told ʝm wo owned te kaɾ. ʝs and was on a ɾebolbeɾ in ʝs
pokket ebeɾi minute e was in te ouse----" e bɾoke off defjant͡ɬi.
"wat if i did teʝ ʝm? tat feʝow ad it kominɡ to ʝm. e tɾew
dust into iouɾ eies xust like e did in daisi's but e was a touɡ
one. e ɾan obeɾ miɾt͡ɬe like iou'd ɾun obeɾ a doɡ and nebeɾ eben stopped
ʝs kaɾ."

teɾe was notʝnɡ i kould sai, ekssept te one unutteɾable fakt
tat it wasn't tɾwe.

"and if iou tʝnk i didn't abe mi ʃaɾe of suffeɾinɡ--look eɾe, wen i
went to xibe up tat flat and saw tat damn boks of doɡ biskwits sittinɡ
teɾe on te sideboaɾd i sat down and kɾjed like a babi. bi ɡod it
was awful----"

i kouldn't foɾxibe ʝm oɾ like ʝm but i saw tat wat e ad done was,
to ʝm, entiɾeli xustifjed. it was aʝ beɾi kaɾeless and konfused.
tei weɾe kaɾeless people, tom and daisi--tei smaʃed up tʝnɡs and
kɾeatuɾes and ten ɾetɾeated bakk into teiɾ monei oɾ teiɾ bast
kaɾelessness oɾ watebeɾ it was tat kept tem toxeteɾ, and let oteɾ
people klean up te mess tei ad made. . . .

i ʃook ands wit ʝm; it seemed siʝi not to, foɾ i felt suddenli as
touɡ i weɾe talkinɡ to a t͡ʃild. ten e went into te xewelɾi stoɾe to
bui a peaɾl nekklase--oɾ peɾaps onli a paiɾ of kuff buttons--ɾid of mi
pɾobinsial skeamiʃness foɾebeɾ.


ɡatsbi's ouse was stiʝ empti wen i left--te ɡɾass on ʝs lawn ad
ɡɾown as lonɡ as mine. one of te taksi dɾibeɾs in te biʝaxe nebeɾ
took a faɾe past te entɾanse ɡate witout stoppinɡ foɾ a minute and
pointinɡ inside; peɾaps it was e wo dɾobe daisi and ɡatsbi obeɾ to
east eɡɡ te niɡt of te aksident and peɾaps e ad made a stoɾi
about it aʝ ʝs own. i didn't want to eaɾ it and i aboided ʝm wen i
ɡot off te tɾain.

i spent mi satuɾdai niɡts in new ioɾk bekause tose ɡleaminɡ, dasslinɡ
paɾtjes of ʝs weɾe wit me so bibidli tat i kould stiʝ eaɾ te
musik and te lauɡteɾ faint and insessant fɾom ʝs ɡaɾden and te
kaɾs ɡoinɡ up and down ʝs dɾibe. one niɡt i did eaɾ a mateɾjal kaɾ
teɾe and saw its liɡts stop at ʝs fɾont steps. but i didn't
inbestiɡate. pɾobabli it was some final ɡest wo ad been awai at te
ends of te eaɾt and didn't know tat te paɾti was obeɾ.

on te last niɡt, wit mi tɾunk pakked and mi kaɾ sold to te ɡɾoseɾ,
i went obeɾ and looked at tat wxe inkoeɾent failuɾe of a ouse onse
moɾe. on te wʝte steps an obssene woɾd, skɾawled bi some boi wit a
pjese of bɾikk, stood out kleaɾli in te moonliɡt and i eɾased it,
dɾawinɡ mi ʃoe ɾaspinɡli alonɡ te stone. ten i wandeɾed down to te
beat͡ʃ and spɾawled out on te sand.

most of te biɡ ʃoɾe plases weɾe klosed now and teɾe weɾe aɾdli ani
liɡts ekssept te ʃadowi, mobinɡ ɡlow of a feriboat akɾoss te sound.
and as te moon ɾose ʝɡeɾ te inessentjal ouses beɡan to melt awai
until ɡɾadwaʝi i bekame awaɾe of te old island eɾe tat floweɾed
onse foɾ dutt͡ʃ sailoɾs' eies--a fɾeʃ, ɡɾeen bɾeast of te new woɾld.
its baniʃed tɾees, te tɾees tat ad made wai foɾ ɡatsbi's ouse, ad
onse pandeɾed in wʝspeɾs to te last and ɡɾeatest of aʝ wman dɾeams;
foɾ a tɾansitoɾi ent͡ʃanted moment man must abe eld ʝs bɾeat in te
pɾesense of tʝs kontinent, kompeʝed into an aestetik kontemplatjon
e neiteɾ undeɾstood noɾ desiɾed, fase to fase foɾ te last time in
ʝstoɾi wit sometʝnɡ kommensuɾate to ʝs kapasiti foɾ wondeɾ.

and as i sat teɾe bɾoodinɡ on te old, unknown woɾld, i touɡt of
ɡatsbi's wondeɾ wen e fiɾst pikked out te ɡɾeen liɡt at te end of
daisi's dokk. e ad kome a lonɡ wai to tʝs blwe lawn and ʝs dɾeam must
abe seemed so klose tat e kould aɾdli fail to ɡɾasp it. e did not
know tat it was alɾeadi beʝnd ʝm, someweɾe bakk in tat bast obskuɾiti
beiond te siti, weɾe te daɾk fjelds of te ɾepublik ɾoʝed on undeɾ
te niɡt.

ɡatsbi beljebed in te ɡɾeen liɡt, te oɾɡastik futuɾe tat ieaɾ bi
ieaɾ ɾesedes befoɾe us. it eluded us ten, but tat's no matteɾ--tomorow
we wiʝ ɾun fasteɾ, stɾett͡ʃ out ouɾ aɾms faɾteɾ. . . . and one fine
moɾninɡ----

so we beat on, boats aɡainst te kurent, boɾne bakk seaselessli into
te past.